al-Farabi
First published Fri Jul 15, 2016; substantive revision Fri Jul 24, 2020
We know little that is really reliable about
al-Fârâbî’s life. Abû Nasr
al-Fârâbî was probably born in 870 CE (AH 257) in a
place called Farab or Farayb. In his youth he moved to Iraq and
Baghdad. In 943 CE (AH 331) he went to Syria and Damascus. He may have
gone to Egypt but died in Damascus in December 950 CE or January 951
CE (AH 339). Scholars have disputed his ethnic origin. Some claimed he
was Turkish but more recent research points to him being a
Persian (Rudolph 2017: 536–45).
Al-Fârâbî had two main interests:
Philosophy and logic in particular. Such interest explains why he
is known as “the second master” (the first one, of course,
being Aristotle) and
Music. His huge
Kitâb al-musiqâ
al-kabîr
or
Great Book of Music
is the most
important medieval musical treatise in Islamic lands and also includes
sophisticated philosophical sections.
Beginning in the 1980s, much has happened in Farabian scholarship. New
and better editions of his works as well as new and better
translations have led to deeper studies of his thought and to some
interesting and lively controversies. More current bibliographies
allow for more detailed research. We still lack critical editions,
full English translations—and even, at times, translation in any
language of several texts—as well as a solid introduction to
al-Fârâbî’s philosophy. More research is also
needed to better understand the relation between his philosophical and
musical interests.
One can find the most recent and detailed listings of
al-Fârâbî’s works and their translations in
Ulrich Rudolph, “Abû Nasr
al-Fârâbî” (2017: 526–594), and Philippe
Vallat (2004: 379–87). Also, Jon McGinnis & David. C.  Reisman
translated a series of Farabian texts in their
Classical Arabic
Philosophy: An Anthology of Sources
(2007: 54–120).
1.
Enumeration of the Sciences
2. Language
3. Logic
4. Mathematics and Music
5. Physics
6. Metaphysics
7. Ethics and Politics
8. Conclusion
Bibliography
Research Tools
Primary Literature
Secondary Literature
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1.
Enumeration of the Sciences
In what follows we will underline important scholarly developments of
the last thirty years and add useful complements to these listings. In
order to highlight these scholarly developments we will follow the
traditional order of the Aristotelian sciences that
al-Fârâbî himself offers in his
Enumeration of
the sciences
,
‘Ihsâ’
al-‘ulûm
, one of his most famous texts, as its
Medieval Latin versions had much influence in the West. There is no
full English translation of this text, but Amor Cherni (2015)
published an edition with French translation and commentaries.
Recently, a new critical edition with German translation of one of the two
Medieval Latin versions have come out:
Über die
Wissenschaften (de scientiis)
Dominicus Gundissalinus’
version (2006). Alain Galonnier published a critical edition, French translation and study of the other Medieval latin version: Le De scientiis  Alfarabii de Gerard de Cremone (2016). Following this
traditional theoretical order makes much sense since we know very
little about the chronological order of
al-Fârâbî’s works, even if there is some
indication that
The Opinions of the People of the Virtuous
City
, also known as
The Perfect State
, and
The
Political Regime
, also known as
The Principles of the
Beings
, may be among his latest works. The paucity of serious
information about the chronological order of
al-Fârâbî’s works makes it difficult to
determine whether some inconsistencies and tensions between different
works result from an evolution in his thought, as Damien Janos claims (2019, pp. 166–70), or hint at a distinction
between exoteric and esoteric treatises or simply arise from
limitations inherent to human nature that affect even the greatest
philosophers. As al-Fârâbî understood philosophy as
all-encompassing and attempted to present coherent views, some works
straddle several philosophical disciplines and so we will indicate
when such is the case. Al-Fârâbî’s knowledge
of Aristotle’s works is extensive, and even includes some of his
zoological treatises.
2. Language
In the
Enumeration of the Sciences
al-Fârâbî first focuses on language, grammar,
metrics, etc. His
Kitâb al-Hurûf
(Book of Letters)
or
Particles
, gives us much information on his views on
language. Muhsin Mahdi, who published the first edition of this text
in 1969a based on a single manuscript, later on found two other manuscripts but could not complete a new edition. Making
use of the new material already gathered by Mahdi, Charles Butterworth
has prepared a second edition with facing full English
translation to be published by Cornell University Press. Muhammad Ali Khalidi gave a partial English translation
covering the middle section (2005).  Thérèse-Anne Druart
(2010) began studying al-Fârâbî’s innovative
views of language. In Freiburg-im-Brisgau Nadja Germann (2015-16) and her team
have been working on language and logic in classical Arabic and are more and
more impressed by the sophistication of
al-Fârâbî’s positions. As for
al-Fârâbî, music is at the service of speech, the
last section of the
Great Book of Music
explains how
technically to fit music to speech, i.e., poetry, in order to enhance
the meaning of a text. Azza Abd al-Hamid Madian’s 1992 Ph. D.
dissertation for Cornell University,
Language-music relationships
in al-Fârâbî’s “Grand Book of
Music”
, includes an English translation of this section.
3. Logic
Next to the study of language, al-Fârâbî considers
logic. For a long time the possibility of a serious study of
al-Fârâbî’s logic remained somewhat elusive.
Editions and translations of his logical works, except for his
[‘Long’]
Commentary on Aristotle’s De
Interpretatione
(Zimmerman 1981), were scattered in
various journals and collective works often difficult to access. Many
of these texts were more critically edited and gathered
in
al-mantiq ‘inda al-Fârâbî
, ed. by
Rafîq al-‘Ajam and Majid Fakhry in 4
vol. (1985–87). In 1987–89 Muhammad Taqî
Dânishpazuh published in Qumm a more complete collection of
logical texts, including a newly discovered part of a long commentary
on the
Prior Analytics
.  Soon afterwards, two books on Farabian logic followed: Shukri
B. Abed,
Aristotelian Logic and the Arabic Language in
Alfârâbî
(1991) and Joep
Lameer,
Al-Fârâbî & Aristotelian
Syllogistics: Greek Theory & Islamic Practice
(1994). In 2006 Mauro Zonta published fragments of a long commentary
on the
Categories
in Hebrew, Arabic, and English translation. John
Watt (2008) assessed the influence of the Syriac organon on
al-Fârâbî and Kamran Karimullah (2014) dedicated a
lengthy article to al-Fârâbî’s views on
conditionals. Translations now are coming out: Alfarabi’s Book of Dialectic (Kitab al-Jadal) (David M. Di Pasquale, 2019), and Al-Farabi, Syllogism (Wilfird Hodges & Saloua Chatti, forthcoming), as well as further studies of al-Farabi’s logic by Saloua Chatti (2019) and papers by Terrence J. Kleven (2013)  and Riccardo Strobino (2019).
Some issues dealt with in logic are also relevant to ethics and
metaphysics. Al-Farabi sees logic as the path to happiness (Germann, 2015). He also discusses the issue of future contingents. If the truth
value of statements on future contingents is immediately determined,
i.e., before the event happens, then everything is predetermined and
freewill is an illusion. Aristotle treats of this issue in
On
Interpretation
, 9. Al-Fârâbî discusses more
complex aspects of this issue as he adds a consideration of
God’s foreknowledge and defends human freewill against some
theologians (see Peter Adamson (2006), “The Arabic Sea Battle:
al-Fârâbî on the Problem of future
Contingents”).
As Deborah L. Black (1990) showed, following the Alexandrian
tradition, philosophers in Islamic lands consider
Rhetoric
and
Poetics
as integral to logic proper and so parts of
Aristotle’s
Organon
. Lahcen E. Ezzaher (2008:
347–91) translated the short commentary on the Rhetoric.
Frédérique Woerther (2018) & Maroun Aouad are preparing a
new edition of some of al-Fârâbî’s texts on
rhetoric. Stéphane Diebler in
Philosopher à Bagdad
au Xe siècle
(2007) [in fact a very useful collection of
translations of short Farabian works] gave a French translation of the
three very brief treatises al-Fârâbî dedicated to
Poetics. Geert Jan van Gelder & Marlé Hammond (2008:
15–23) translated one of these treatises,
The Book of
Poetics
, into English, as well as a brief relevant passage in the
first part of
The Great Book of Music
. Terrence J. Kleven (2019) studies The Canons of Poetry.  Scholars interested in
political philosophy have highlighted the distinctions
al-Fârâbî makes between (1) demonstrative discourse,
reflecting Aristotle’s positions in the
Posterior
Analytics
(in Arabic this text is known as
The Book of
Demonstration
), and which alone is philosophical
stricto
sensu
, (2) dialectical discourse, typical of the
“
mutakallimûn
” or theologians and linked to
Aristotle’s
Topics
, and (3) rhetorical and poetical
discourse, used in the Qur’ân or Jewish and Christian
Scriptures in order to address ordinary people.
Great respect for Aristotle’s theory of demonstration led
al-Fârâbî to attempt to fit any theoretical
discipline in its framework, though some of them, such as music, do
not exclusively rest on necessary and universal primary principles, as
they also include principles derived from empirical observations
(Miriam Galston, 2019). As music is dear to
al-Fârâbî, it is in the first part of his
Great
Book on Music
that we find the most extensive consideration of
primary empirical principles and their derivation from careful
examination of practice, i.e., in this case of musical
performances.
4. Mathematics and Music
After logic comes mathematics. For al-Fârâbî
mathematical sciences include arithmetic, geometry, optics, astronomy,
music, the science of weights and mechanics. Only recently has more
attention be paid to this aspect of Farabian thought. Gad Freudenthal
(1988) focused on al-Fârâbî’s views on
geometry. Except for pointing to al-Fârâbî’s
rejection, in contradistinction to al-Kindî, of the validity of
what we now call astrology, scholars had neglected his views on
astronomy and cosmology. Damien Janos’s
Method, Structure,
and Development in al-Fârâbî’s Cosmology
(2012) has filled this gap. His book throws new light on various
aspects of al-Fârâbî’s astronomy, cosmology,
and philosophy of nature. It also highlights the link between
cosmology and metaphysics. Johannes Thomann (2010–11) pointed to
a newly discovered commentary on the Almagest attributed to
al-Fârâbî (Ms. Tehran Maglis 6531).
In the
Enumeration
al-Fârâbî follows the
traditional classification of music under mathematics. In
The
Great Book of Music
he certainly indicates that music derives
some of its principles from mathematics but he also insists, as we
said above, on the importance of performance for determining its
empirical principles. On some points the ear, rather than theoretical
reflections, is the ultimate judge, even if at times the ear
contradicts some mathematical principle. For instance, he is well
aware that a semitone is not exactly the half of a tone. Of
The
Great book of Music
there exists only one full translation, that
of Rodolphe d’Erlanger into French (originally published in
1930–35 before the Arabic text was edited; reprint 2001). Only
partial English translations exist. I referred to two of them: one in
the section on language and one in the logic section under poetics.
George Dimitri Sawa (2009) translated the two chapters on rhythm.
Alison Laywine (McGill University), both a philosopher with excellent
knowledge of Greek musical theories and a ‘Oud player, is
preparing a full English translation of this complex and lengthy text.
Yet,
The Great Book
is not the only text
al-Fârâbî dedicated to music. After having written
it, dissatisfied with his explanation of rhythms, he subsequently
wrote two shorter texts on rhythms (English translation of both by Sawa
2009). Apparently al-Fârâbî invented a system of
notation for rhythms.  In his
Philosophies of Music in Medieval
Islam
Fadlou Shehadi (1995) dedicates his third chapter to
al-Fârâbî.  Thérèse-Anne Druart (2020) shows how al-Farabi links music to language, logic and even politics.
5. Physics
After mathematics comes physics. We have only a few Farabian texts
dealing with physics taken in the broadest sense and covering the
whole of natural philosophy. Paul Lettinck addresses some of
al-Fârâbî’s views on physics in his
Aristotle’s Physics and its Reception in the Arabic
World
(1994) and Janos (2012) also does so. Marwan Rashed (2008)
attempted a reconstruction of a lost treatise on changing beings.
Al-Fârâbî wrote a little treatise rejecting the
existence of the vacuum by means of an experiment. Necati Lugal & Aydin Sayili (1951)
published the Arabic with an English translation.
The substantive
Refutation of Galen’s Critique of
Aristotle’s Views on Human Organs
merits serious studies.
‘Abdurrahman Badawi edited it in his
Traités
philosophiques
(1983: 38–107). It shows
al-Fârâbî’s interest in Aristotle’s
zoological works and develops interesting parallels between the
hierarchical structure of the organs of the human body, that of
cosmology, that of emanation, and that of the ideal state. Badr El-Fakkak (2017) explains these parallels and Jawdath Jadour (2018) studies the structure of this text, which remains untranslated, and presents a new edition of al-Farabi’s Epistle on medicine.
Physics includes Aristotle’s
On the soul
and scholars
have paid much attention to al-Fârâbî’s little
treatise
On intellect
(ed. by M. Bouyges, 1983). A full
English translation of this important treatise, of which there exist
two Medieval Latin versions, was finally given by McGinnis &
Reisman in their
Classical Arabic Philosophy
(2007:
68–78). Philippe Vallat published an extensive study of al-Farabi’s views on the intellect (2019a). The issue of the soul and the intellect is linked to logic, ethics, cosmology, and metaphysics. It also gives rise to a
debate. Earlier scholars considered that for
al-Fârâbî universals are acquired by emanation from
the Agent Intellect, which for him is the tenth and last Intelligence,
even if in many passages the second master uses the language of
abstraction. Recently, Richard Taylor (2006 & 2010) argued that,
on the contrary, there is genuine abstraction in
al-Fârâbî, even if in some ways it involves the
emanative power of the Agent Intellect.
6. Metaphysics
Metaphysics follows physics. It is not easy to assess
al-Fârâbî’s understanding of metaphysics. The
very brief treatise,
The Aims of Aristotle’s
Metaphysics
, insists that, contrary to what most people assume,
metaphysics is not a theological science but rather investigates
whatever is common to all existing beings, such as being and unity.
McGinnis and Reisman provide a full English translation in their
Classical Arabic Philosophy
(2007: 78–81). In 1989
Muhsin Mahdi published the Arabic text of a short treatise
On One
and Unity
. It is still untranslated but Damien Janos (2017) explained its structure and contents and Philippe Vallat (2019b) studied it. Many passages of
The Book of Letters
are of
great metaphysical import as Stephen Menn (2008) showed. These texts
raise the question of the exact relation between logic and
metaphysics, as, for instance, both disciplines treat of the
categories (see Thérèse-Anne Druart (2007) & Kristell Trego (2018)). Such texts
present an Aristotelian outlook focusing on ontology that sharply
distinguishes metaphysics from Kalâm and seem to leave limited
space for philosophical theology and Neo-Platonic descent in
particular.
On the other hand, both
The Opinions of the People of the Perfect
City
and
The Political Regime
or
The Principles of
Beings
begin with a metaphysical part presented as a Neo-Platonic
descent followed by a second part dealing with the organization of the
city or state and do not treat of being and unity as the most
universal notions. The hierarchical structure of the ideal state
mirrors the hierarchical emanationist structure presented in the first
part. Walzer edited the former with an English translation under the
title
The Perfect State
(1985) and Fauzi M. Najjar edited the
latter (1964). Charles Butterworth (2015) provided the first full
English translation of
The Political Regime
in
The
Political Writings
, vol. II, pp. 27–94. The question of how
exactly the ontology relates to the Neo-Platonic descent or emanation
has not yet been fully clarified, though
The Enumeration of the
Sciences
addresses both aspects. Furthermore, whether the
Neo-Platonic descent grounds the political philosophy or metaphysics
is simply a rhetorical appeal to make
al-Fârâbî’s controversial political and
philosophical views palatable to religious authorities and ordinary
people is a hotly debated issue. Disciples of Leo Strauss and of
Muhsin Mahdi divide al-Fârâbî’s views into
exoteric ones for a broad audience and esoteric ones written for an
intellectual elite. The exoteric are more compatible with the
religious views and speak, for instance, of an immortality of the
human soul, whereas such views are deliberately muted in esoteric
writings (below we will see that a lost treatise of
al-Fârâbî may have denied the immortality of the
soul). Among the most recent “Straussian” positions on
this debate one can find two papers by Charles E. Butterworth: (1)
“How to Read Alafarabi” (2013), and (2)
“Alfarabi’s Goal: Political Philosophy, Not Political
Theology” (2011). Recently, Philippe Vallat (2019c) attempted to clarify what al-Farabi means by “esoterism,” Some other scholars such as Dimitri Gutas, S. Menn
and Th.-A. Druart take Farabian metaphysics, including the
Neo-Platonic descent as at the core of
al-Fârâbî’s works, even if in his
Philosophy of Aristotle
, al-Fârâbî treats
little of metaphysics. We will say more on this controversy in
presenting ethics and politics, which in the Farabian classification
of sciences, follow metaphysics.
7. Ethics and Politics
Al-Fârâbî dealt little with ethics, but part of the
controversy stems from what we may know of his lost
Commentary on
the Nicomachean Ethics
, his main foray in Ethics. Despite the
existence of an Arabic translation of Aristotle’s
Nicomachean Ethics
(ed. by A. A. Akasoy & A. Fidora with
an English translation by D.M. Dunlop, 2005), we see few signs of its
influence in al-Fârâbî’s extant writings. Yet,
al-Fârâbî wrote on it a lost commentary, to which
three Andalusian philosophers, Ibn Bâjja, Ibn Tufayl and
Averroes, refer. According to them, therein
al-Fârâbî denied the immortality of the human soul
as well as the possibility of any conjunction with the active or Agent
Intellect, considering them tall tales. Yet, in many other works, such
as the
Treatise on the Intellect
, the
Opinions
, and
the
Political Regime
, he claims that this conjunction is
possible and constitutes ultimate happiness. If what the Andalusian
philosophers report, presents an accurate reading of this lost text,
then the disciples of Leo Strauss may have some justification in reading
al-Fârâbî’s works as divided between exoteric
and esoteric ones since the content of this work would contradict
views in more popular texts, such as the
Opinions
in which
the Neo-Platonic influence is the strongest. Neo-Platonic metaphysics,
construed mainly as the descent and emanation, would provide an
exoteric view good for a more general public, but denied in the
esoteric works reserved for an intellectual elite. Chaim
Meir Neria (2013) published two quotations from this commentary (in
Hebrew translation and with English translation) that have been newly
discovered and gave a summary of the issue.
Though we do not have any ethical text from
al-Fârâbî relying mainly on the
Nicomachean
Ethics
, Marwan Rashed (2019) discussed his ethical outlook in relying on the Attainment of Happiness. We do have a brief ethical treatise in the tradition of
Hellenistic ethics,
Directing Attention to the Way of
Happiness
or
Tanbîh
(not to be confused with the
Attainment of Happiness
or
Tahsîl
), which is
propaedeutic to the study of philosophy proper and of logic in
particular (English translation in McGinnis & Reisman’s
Classical Arabic Philosophy
(2007: 104–20)). This
treatise (1) incites the student to curb his passions in order to be
able to focus on his studies and (2) encourages him to begin the study
of philosophy and of logic in particular. It is obviously
pre-philosophical and serves as introduction to a Farabian elementary
introduction to logic
The Utterances Employed in Logic
(Mahdi’s edition, 1968;
no English translation). Al-Fârâbî’s
conception of truly philosophical ethics remains unclear as we have so
little extended textual basis to establish it. Janne Mattila (2017) compared the philosopher’s ethical progression in al-Farabi and in al-Razi. Ethics, when treating of our relations with other people, implies intersubjectivity, but al-Farabi, though not treating it much in what concerns this life, offers an interesting picture of it in the afterlife (Druart, 2017).
Al-Fârâbi’s political philosophy fared much better
and has attracted much attention from many scholars. According to
The Enumeration
, it also includes
kalâm
, i.e.,
non-philosophical theology, and
fiqh
or Islamic law. Many
Farabian political works have been translated into English. Muhsin
Mahdi translated three of them in
Philosophy of Plato and
Aristotle
(1969b; reprint 2001), which contains
The Attainment
of Happiness
,
The Philosophy of Plato
, and
The
Philosophy of Aristotle
. These three texts form a trilogy.
Charles E. Butterworth in,
The Political Writings
, vol. I
(2001), translated
Selected Aphorisms
, part V of
The
Enumeration of the Sciences
,
Book of Religion
, and
The Harmonization of the Two Opinions of the Two Sages: Plato the
Divine and Aristotle
and in vol. II (2015),
Political
Regime
and
Summary of Plato’s Laws
.
Al-Fârâbî does not take inspiration from
Aristotle’s
Politics
(a text which does not seem to
have been translated or summarized into Arabic) but rather takes some
inspiration from Plato’s
Republic
and
Laws
,
even if his access to these two texts may have been rather limited, as
there is some doubt that a full Arabic translation of them ever
existed. Though Averroes wrote a commentary of sort on the
Republic
, its brevity and content do not testify to an
in-depth knowledge of the whole text. Yet, David C. Reisman (2004)
discovered an Arabic translation of a single passage from the
Republic
(VI, 506d3–509b10). As for the
Laws
,
we certainly have al-Fârâbî’s
Summary of
Plato’s Laws
, but this text (Arabic ed. by Th.-A. Druart
(1998) and English translation by Butterworth, in
The Political
Writings
, II, (2015: 129–73)) is very brief and covers only
the first eight books. Whether this summary relies on a full or
partial Arabic translation of the
Laws
or on a translation of
a Greek summary, possibly that of Galen (lost in Greek), at this stage
cannot be determined. For the latest
status quaestionis
about
Arabic translations of Plato’s works and their paucity, see
Dimitri Gutas (2012). Al-Fârâbî’s own brief
Philosophy of Plato
does not exhibit detailed knowledge of
Plato’s works.
Though al-Fârâbî’s political philosophy takes
some inspiration from Plato, it much transforms it in important and
interesting ways to reflect a very different world and adapt it to it.
Instead of a monolingual and monoethnic city state,
al-Fârâbî envisions a vast multicultural,
multilingual, and multireligious empire (Alexander Orwin, 2017). He also sees the necessity to
make of the philosopher king a philosopher prophet ruler.
Al-Fârâbî’s
Summary of Plato’s
Laws
caused much controversy, which Butterworth narrates in the
introduction to his translation (2015: 97–127). In 1995 Joshua
Parens, making use of a draft of Druart’s edition, published
Metaphysics as Rhetoric: Alfarabi’s
Summary of
Plato’s “Laws”. He argued that
al-Fârâbî takes metaphysics, or maybe more exactly
special metaphysics or the Neo-Platonic descent, i.e., what treats of
immaterial beings rather than ontology, as a form of rhetoric, and
that such was already the case for Plato. Whether or not we should
read Plato as Parens and other Straussians claim
al-Fârâbî understood him is a hotly debated
question.
Marwan Rashed (2009) introduced a new element in the controversy by
putting into serious doubt the authenticity of
al-Fârâbî’s
Harmonization of the Opinions
of the Two Sages
. Following an Alexandrian tradition, this
treatise (for Butterworth’s 2001 English translation, see above)
argues that, despite a series of issues on which Aristotle and Plato
seem to contradict each other, there is remarkable harmony between
these two sages, as one can easily resolve such contradictions. This
text also refers (1) to the so-called
Aristotle’s
Theology
, which in fact Aristotle never wrote, as it derives from
Plotinus, and (2) to Proclus Arabus, as Peter Adamson (forthcoming)
shows. On the other hand, Cecilia Martini Bonadeo, in her 2008
critical edition and Italian translation of this text
(al-Fârâbî,
L’armonia delle opinioni dei
due sapienti, il divino Platone e Aristotele
), argued for the
Farabian authenticity of this text.  Whether one accepts the Farabian
authorship of this text affects one’s understanding of the whole
controversy of how to read al-Fârâbî, as well as
one’s understanding of the relationship between his
Aristotelianism and his Neo-Platonism. It also makes the whole issue
of the relationship between his metaphysics and his political
philosophy still more complex and convoluted.
Among the most recent developments, expressed in various articles, on
the Straussian side, let us point to Butterworth’s “How to
Read Alfarabi” (2013) and “Alfarabi’s Goal:
Political Philosophy, Not Political Theology” (2011) to which I
referred earlier. On the other side, we can point to Charles
Genequand’s “Théologie et philosophie. La
providence chez al-Fârâbî et
l’authenticité de l’
Harmonie des opinions des
deux sages
” (2012), which objects to M. Rashed’s
declaring the
Harmonization
inauthentic, and his (2013)
“Le Platon d’al-Fârâbî”. Amor
Cherni (2015), on the other hand, published a book on the
relation between politics and metaphysics in
al-Fârâbî (
La cité et ses opinions:
Politique et métaphysique ches Abû Nasr
al-Fârâbî
), which includes an appendix
rejecting the authenticity of
The Harmonization
.
8. Conclusion
Though we now have more decent editions of
al-Fârâbî’s texts and more complete
translations, in English and in French in particular, many such
editions and translations are scattered in various books and journals.
Gathering all of al-Fârâbî’s available texts
is no mean accomplishment. If Oxford University Press would publish
The Philosophical Works of al-Fârâbî
, as it
did for al-Kindî in 2012 (one volume, ed. by P. Adamson &
P.E. Pormann), beginning with those still untranslated or not fully
translated into English, as well as those whose English translation is
hidden in rare books or unusual journals, we would be eternally
grateful, but we are well aware that it would require several volumes
and much time.
Some texts still need to be better edited. Some texts are not
translated at all into any European language or not yet into English.
Scholars do not always seem fully aware of what is available and what
other scholars have said. Much more work still needs to be done, but a
clearer and more complex picture of
al-Fârâbî’s works is emerging. It highlights
their breadth and sophistication, even if we still have trouble
piecing together all the parts.
Bibliography
Research Tools
Bibliographies
Al-Mawrid
(Special Issue on Al-Farabi), 4(3), 1975.
Chavooshi, Jafar Aghayani,
Al-Fârâbî: An
Annotated Bibliography
, Tehran, 1976.
Cunbur, Müjgan, Ismet Ninark & Nejat Sefercioglu,
Fârâbî Bibliyografyasi
, Ankara: Bashakanhk
Basimevi, 1973.
Daiber, Hans,
Bibliography of Islamic Philosophy
(from
the 15
th
Century to 1999) 2 vol., Leiden: Brill, 1999 and
its
Supplement
, Leiden: Brill, 2007, much complete and update
these pioneers works.
Druart, Thérèse-Anne,
Brief Bibliographical Guide in Medieval and Post-Classical Islamic Philosophy and Theology
, 
 available online in yearly installments and includes a section on
 al-Fârâbî.
Rescher, Nicholas,
Al-Fârâbî: An Annotated
Bibliography
, Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 1962.
Dictionary
Alon, Ilai and Shukri B. Abed,
Al-Fârâbî’s Philosophical Lexicon
, 2
volumes (volume I: Arabic Text; volume II: English translation).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002 (provides
al-Fârâbî’s own definitions of technical
philosophical terms).
Primary Literature
Works by al-Fârâbî
The following are listed by editors/translators:
al-‘Ajam, Rafîq & Majid Fakhry (eds.),
1985–87, al-Fârâbî,
al-mantiq ‘inda
al-Fârâbî
, in 4 volumes, Beirut: Dar
al-Mashriq.
Badawi, ‘Abdurrahman, 1983,
Traites philosophiques par
al-Kindi, al-Farabi, Ibn Bajjah & Ibn ‘Adyy
, 3rd
edition, Beirut: Dar Al-Andaloss.
Bonadeo, Cecilia Martini (ed.), 2008,
al-Fârâbî,
L’armonia delle opinioni dei
due sapienti, il divino Platone e Aristotele
, Pisa: Plus.
Bouyges, Maurice (trans. and ed.), 1983, Alfarabi,
Risalat
fi’l-‘Aql
, 2
nd
edition, Beirut: Imprimerie
Catholique.
Butterworth, Charles E. (ed. and trans.), 2001, Alfarabi,
The
Political Writings: “Selected Aphorisms” and Other
Texts
(Volume I), Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
––– (ed. and trans.), 2015, Alfarabi,
The
Political Writings: “Political Regime” and “Summary
of Plato’s Laws”
(Volume II), Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
––– (ed. and trans.), forthcoming, Alfarabi,
Book of Letters, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Chatti, Saloua & Hodges, Wilfrid (trans.), forthcoming,
Al-Farabi, Syllogism: An Abdrigement of Aristotle’s Prior
Analytics
, London: Bloomsbury.
Cherni, Amor (trans. and ed.), 2015, al-Fârâbî,
Le recensement des sciences
, Paris: Al Bouraq.
Dânishpazuh, Muhammad Taqî (ed.), 1987–89,
al-Fârâbî, al-mantiqiyyât
lilfârâbî
, 3 volumes, Qumm: Matba‘at
Bahman.
Diebler, Stéphane (trans), 2007,
al-Fârâbî,
Philosopher à Bagdad au Xe
siècle
, introduction by Ali Benmakhlouf, glossary by
Pauline Koetschet, Paris: Seuil.
DiPasquale, David M. (trans.), 2019,
Alfarabi’s Book of
Dialectic
(Kitab al-Jadal):
On the Starting Point of Islamic
Philosophy
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Druart, Thérèse-Anne (ed.), 1998, “Le
Sommaire du livre des ‘Lois’ de Platon”,
Bulletin d’Études Orientales
, 50:
109–55;
d’Erlanger, Rodolphe (trans.), 1930–35,
La
musique arabe: Al-Fârâbî, Grand Traité de la
Musique
, vol. I–II, Paris: Geuthner,
reprint (Paris: 2001).
Ezzaher, Lahcen E. (ed.), 2008, “Alfarabi’s
Book
of Rhetoric
: An Arabic-English translation of Alfarabi’s
Commentary on Aristotle’s
Rhetoric
”,
Rhetorica
, 26(4): 347–91.
––– (transl.), 2015,
Three Arabic Treatises
on Aristotle’s “Rhetoric”
(translation,
introduction, & notes), Carbondale: Southern Illinois University
Press , pp. 12–49.
Galonnier, A. (ed. and trans.), 2016,
Le ‘De
scientiis Alfarabii’ de Gérarde de Crémone:
Contributions aux problèmes de l’acculturation au XIIe
siècle.  Étude introductive et édition critique,
traduite et annotée
, Turnhout: Brepols.
van Gelder, Geert Jan & Marlé Hammond (trans. and
eds), 2008,
Takhyîl: The Imaginary in Classical Arabic
Poetics
, Exeter: Gibb Memorial Trust, pp. 15–23.
Gundissalinus, Dominicus [ca. 1150] (transl.), 2006,
al-Fârâbî,
Über die Wissenschaften (de
scientiis)
, Jakob Hans Josef Schneider (ed.), Freiburg: Herder .
Khalidi, Muhammad Ali (ed. and trans.), 2005,
al-Fârâbî, “The Book of Letters”, in his
Medieval Islamic Philosophical Writings
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 1–26.
Lugal, Necati & Aydin Sayili, 1951, “Maqâla
fî l-Khalâ”,
Belleten (Türk Tarih
Kurumu)
, 15: 1–16 & 21–36.
Mahdi, Muhsin (ed.), 1968, al-Fârâbi,
Utterances
Employed in Logic
, introduction and notes, Beirut: Dar
el-Mashreq.
––– (ed.), 1969a,
Alfarabi’s Book of
Letters
(Kitab al-Huruf), Arabic text, introduction and notes,
Beirut: Dar el-Mashreq.
––– (ed.), 1969b,
Alfarabi’s Philosophy of
Plato and Aristotle
, translated with an introduction,
2
nd
edition, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press;
reprinted 2002.
––– (ed.), 1989,
Alfarabi’s On One and
Unity
, Casablanca: Toubkal .
McGinnis, Jon & David C. Reisman (eds.), 2007,
Classical
Arabic Philosophy: An Anthology of Sources
, Indianapolis: Hackett
Publishing, pp. 54–120.
Najjar, Fauzi M. (ed.), 1964,
Al-Fârâbî’s The Political Regime
,
with introduction & notes, Beirut: Imprimerie Catholique .
Neria, Cahim Meir, 2013,
“Al-Fârâbî’s Lost Commentary on the
Ethics: New Textual Evidence”,
Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy
, 23(1): 69–99.
Rashed, Marwan, 2008, “Al-Fârâbî’s
lost treatise
On changing beings
and the possibility of a
demonstration of the eternity of the world”,
Arabic Sciences
and Philosophy
, 18(1): 19–58.
Sawa, George Dimitri, 2009,
Rhythmic Theories and Practices
in Arabic Writings to 339 AH/950 CE : Annotated translations and
commentaries
, Ottawa: The Institute of Mediaeval Music.
Sayili, Aydin, 1951, “Al-Farabi’s Article on Vacuum”,
Belleten
(Turk Tarih Kurumu), 15: 151–74.
Walzer, Richard (ed. and trans.), 1985,
Al-Faradi on the
Perfect State
, with introduction and commentary, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Zimmerman, F.W., 1981,
Al-Farabi’s Commentary and Short
Treatise on Aristotle’s “De interpretatione”
(translation, introduction & notes), London: British
Academy.
Works by other authors
[Aristotle] Akasoy, A.A. & A. Fidora (eds.), 2005,
The
Arabic Version of the “Nicomachean Ethics”
, with an
English translation by D.M. Dunlop, Leiden: Brill.
[al-Kindî] Adamson, Peter and Peter E. Pormann (ed.), 2012,
The Philosophical Works of al-Kindi
(Studies in Islamic
Philosophy), Karachi: Oxford University Press.
Secondary Literature
Abed, Shukri B., 1991,
Aristotelian Logic and the Arabic
Language in Alfârâbî
, Albany, NY: SUNY
Press.
Adamson, Peter, 2006, “The Arabic Sea Battle:
al-Fârâbî on the Problem of future
Contingents”,
Archiv für Geschichte der
Philosophie
, 88: 163–88.
–––, forthcoming, “Plotinus Arabus and
Proclus Arabus in the Harmony of the Two Philosophers Attributed to
al-Farabi,” in
Reading Proclus and the Book of Causes
(Volume II: Translations and Acculturations), Dragos Calma (ed.),
Leiden: Brill.
Black, Deborah L., 1990,
Logic and Aristotle’s
“Rhetoric” and “Poetics” in Medieval Arabic
Philosophy
, Leiden: Brill.
Butterworth, Charles E., 2011, “Alfarabi’s Goal:
Political Philosophy, Not Political Theology”, in
Islam, the
State, and Political Authority: Medieval Issues and Modern
Concerns
, Asma Afsaruddin (ed.), New York, NY: Palgrave McMillan
US, pp. 53–74.
–––, 2013, “How to Read Alafarabi”,
in
More Modoque: Festschrift for Miklós Maróth
,
edited by P. Fodor et alii, Budapest: Research Centre for the
Humanities of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, pp. 33–41.
Chatti, Saloua, 2019,
Arabic Logic from al-Farabi to Averroes: A
Study of the Early Arabic Categorical, Modal and Hypothetical
Syllogistics
, Basel: Birkhhauser.
Cherni, Amor, 2015,
La cité et ses opinions: Politique
et métaphysique chez Abû Nasr
al-Fârâbî
, Paris: Albouraq.
Daiber, Hans, 1983, “Fârâbîs Abhandlung
über das Vakuum: Quellen und Stellung in der islamischen
Wissenschaftsgeschichte”,
Der Islam
, 60(1):
37–47.
Druart, Thérèse-Anne, 2007,
“Al-Fârâbî, the categories, metaphysics, and
The Book of Letters
”,
Medioevo
, 32:
15–37.
–––, 2010, “Al-Fârâbî:
An Arabic Account of the Origin of Language and of Philosophical
Vocabulary”,
Proceedings of the American Catholic
Philosophical Association
, 84: 1–17.
–––, 2017, “Al-Farabi on Intersubjectivity
in This Life and Thereafter,” in
Promisa nec aspera
currans
, Georgio Rahal & Heinz-Otto Luthe (eds.), Toulouse:
Les Presses Universitaires, pp. 341–54.
–––, 2020, “What Does Music Have to Do
with Language, Logic, and Rulership? Al-Farabi’s Answer,”
in
The Origin and Nature of Language and Logic: Perspectives in
Medieval Islamic, Jewish, and Christian Thought
, Nadja Germann
& Steven Harvey (eds.), Turnhout: Brepols, pp. 193–210.
El-Fekkak, Badr, 2017, “Cosmic, Corporeal and Civil
Regencies: al-Farabi’s anti-Galenic Defence of Hierarchical
Cardiocentrism,” in Philosophy and Medicine in the Formative
Period of Islam, Peter Adamson & Peter E. Pormann (eds.), London:
The Warburg Institute, pp. 255–68.
Freudenthal, Gad, 1988, “La philosophie de la
géométrie d’al-Fârâbî. Son
commentaire sur le début du Ier et le début du Ve livre
des
Éléments
d’Euclide”,
Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam
, 11:
104–219.
Galston, Miriam, 2019, “The Origin of the Primary
Principles: The Role of Nature and Experience,” in
The
Pilgrimage of Philosophy
, Rene M. Paddags, Waseem El-Rayes &
Gregory A. McGrayer (eds.), South Bend, IN: St. Augustine’s Press,
pp. 114–35.
Genequand, Charles, 2012, “Théologie et philosophie.
La providence chez al-Fârâbî et
l’authenticité de l’
Harmonie des opinions des
deux sages
”,
Mélanges de
l’Université Saint-Joseph
, 64: 195–211.
–––, 2013, “Le Platon
d’al-Fârâbî”, in
Lire les dialogues,
mais lesquels et dans quel ordre? Définitions du corpus et
interprétations de Platon
, A. Balansard & I. Koch
(eds.), Sankt Augustin: Academia Verlag, pp. 105–15.
Germann, Nadja, 2015–16,
“Imitation–Ambiguity–Discourse: Some Remarks on
al–Farabi’s Philosophy of Language,”
Melanges de
l’Universite Saint–Joseph
, 66: 135–66.
–––, 2015, “Logic as the Path to
Happiness: Al-Farabi and the Divisions of the Sciences,”
Quaestio
, 15: 15–30.
Gutas, Dimitri, 2012 “Platon: Tradition arabe”, in
Dictionnaire des philosophes antiques
, vol. V-b, Richard
Goulet (ed.), Paris: CNRS, pp. 854–63.
Jabbour, Jawdath, 2018, “La structure du Contre Galien de
Farabi et son epitre sur la medicine,”
Documenti e
Studi
, 29: 89–123.
Janos, Damien, 2012,
Method, Structure, and Development in
al-Fârâbî’s Cosmology
, Leiden: Brill.
–––, 2017, “Al-Farabi’s (d. 950) On the
One and Oneness: Some Preliminary Remarks on Its Structure, Contents,
and Theological Implications,” in
The Oxford Handbook of Islamic
Philosophy
, Khaled El-Rouayheb & Sabine Schmidtke (eds.), Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 101–28.
–––, 2019, “The Role of Developmentalism
in the Study of Arabic Philosophy: Overview and Some Methodological
Insights,” in
La Philosophie arabe a l’etude. Sens, limites
et defis d’une discipline modern
(
Studying Arabic Philosophy:
Meaning, Limits, and Challenges of a Modern Discipline
),
Jean-Baptiste Brenet & Olga Lizzini (eds.), Paris: Vrin,
pp. 113–78.
Karimullah, Kamran, 2014, “Alfarabi on Conditionals”,
Arabic Sciences and Philosophy
, 24(2): 211–67.
Kleven, Terrence F., 2013, “Alfarabi’s Commentary on
Porphyry’s Isagoge (Kitab Isaguji),”
Schede Medievali
,
51: 41–52.
–––, 2019, “Alfarabi’s Account of
Poetry as a Logical Art in A Treatise on the Cannons of the Art of
Poetry,” in
The Pilgrimage of Philosophy
, Rene M. Paddags,
Waseem El-Rayes & Gregory A. McGrayer (eds.), South Bend, IN:
St. Augustine’s Press, pp. 136–52.
Lameer, Joep, 1994,
Al-Fârâbî &
Aristotelian Syllogistics: Greek Theory & Islamic Practice
,
Leiden: Brill.
Lettinck, Paul, 1994,
Aristotle’s Physics and its
Reception in the Arabic World
, Leiden: Brill.
Madian, Azza Abd al-Hamid, 1992,
Language-music relationships
in al-Fârâbî’s “Grand Book of
Music”
, Ph.D. dissertation for Cornell University.
Mattila, Janne, 2017, “The Ethical Progression of the
Philosopher in al-Razi and al-Farabi,”
Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy
, 27(1): 115–37.
Menn, Stephen, 2008, “Al-Fârâbî’s
Kitâb al-Hurûf
and his analysis of the Senses of
Being”,
Arabic Sciences and Philosophy
, 18(1):
59–97.
Orwin, Alexander, 2017,
Redifining the Muslim Community:
Ethnicoity, Religion, and Politics in the Thought of Alfarabi
,
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Parens, Joshua, 1995,
Metaphysics as Rhetoric:
Alfarabi’s “Summary of Plato’s
‘Laws’”
, Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Rashed, Marwan, 2009, “On the Authorship of the Treatise
On the Harmonization of the Opinions of the Two Sages
Attributed to al-Fârâbî”,
Arabic Sciences
& Philosophy
, 19(1): 43–82.
–––, 2019, “Al-Farabi et le parachevement
de l’Ethique a Nicomaque,” in
Ethike Theoria
, F. Masi,
St. Maso & C. Viano (eds.), Rome: Edizioni di storia e
letteratura, pp. 301–38.
Reisman, David C., 2004, “Plato’s
Republic
in Arabic: A Newly Discovered Passage”,
Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy
, 14(2): 263–300.
Rudolph, Ulrich, 2017, “Abû Nasr
al-Fârâbî”, in
Philosophy in the Islamic
World,
(Volume 1:
8th-–10th Centuries
), Ulrich
Rudolph, Rotraud Hansberger & Peter Adamson (eds.), Leiden: Brill,
pp. 526–654.
Shehadi, Fadlou, 1995,
Philosophies of Music in Medieval
Islam
, Leiden: Brill.
Taylor, Richard C., 2006, “Abstraction in
al-Fârâbî”,
Proceedings of the American
Catholic Association
, 80: 151–68
–––, 2010, “The Agent Intellect as
”Form for Us“ and Averroes’s Critique of
al-Fârâbî”, in
Universal Representation
and the Ontology of Individuation
, Gyula Klima & Alexander W.
Hall (eds.), Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing ,
pp. 25–44.
Strobino, Riccardo, 2019, “Varieties of Demonstration in
Alfarabi,”
History & Philosophy of Logic
, 40(1):
22–41.
Thomann, Johannes, 2010–11, “Ein
al-Fârâbî zugeschriebener Kommentar zum Almagest
(Ms. Tehran Maglis 6531)”,
Zeitschrift für Geschichte
der arabisch-islamischen Wissenschaften
, 19: 35–76.
Vallat, Philippe, 2004:
Farabi et l’École
d’Alexandrie. Des prémisses de la connaissance à
la philosophie politique
, Paris: Vrin.
–––, 2019a, “L’intellect selon
Farabi. La transformation du connaitre en etre,” in
Noetique et
theorie de la connaissance dans la philosophie arabe du IXe au XIIe
siècle
, Meryem Sebti & Daniel De Smet (eds.), Paris: Vrin,
pp. 211–41.
–––, 2019b, “Le Livre del’Un et de
l’Unite de Farabi: l’invention persane de la doctrine des
transcendantaux,” in
Commenter au Moyen Age
, Pascale
Bermon & Isabelle Moulin, Paris: Vrin, pp. 211–41.
–––, 2019c, “L’esoterisme de Farabi
explique par lui-meme: nature et fonctions,” in
La philosophie
arabe a l’etude
, J.-B. Brent & O. Lizzini (eds.), Paris:
Vrin, pp. 545–611.
Watt, John, 2008, “Al-Farabi and the History of the Syriac
Organon”, in
Malphono w-Rabo d-Malphone
(Gorgias
Eastern Christian Studies), George Anton Kiraz (ed.), Piscataway, NJ:
Gorgias Press, pp. 751–78. Reprinted separately in 2009,
(Analecta Gorgiana 129), Piscataway, NJ: Gorgias Press.
Woerther, Frederique, 2018, “Al-Farabi commentateur
d’Aristote dans les Didascalia in Rethoricam Aristotelis ex
glosa Alpharabii,” in
Commenting on Aristotle’s Rhetoric
from Antiquity to the Present
, F. Woerther (ed.), Leiden: Brill,
pp. 41–63.
Zonta, Mauro, 2006, “Al-Fârâbî’s
Long Commentary
on Aristotle’s
Categories
in
Hebrew and Arabic. A Critical Edition and English Translation of the
Newly-found Fragments”, in
Studies in Arabic and Islamic
Culture, II
, B. Abrahamov (ed.), Ramat-Gan: Bar-Ilan University
Press , pp. 185–254.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Al-Farabi
,
  webpage on Al-Farabi at muslimphilosophy.com. (This page has links
to a few complete texts of al-Farabi, some in Arabic and some in English translation.)
Al-Farabi
, 
 webpage on Al-Farabi at thegreatthinkers.org.
Related Entries
al-Farabi: philosophy of society and religion
|
al-Farabi: psychology and epistemology
|
Arabic and Islamic Philosophy, disciplines in: metaphysics
|
music, philosophy of