Analytic Philosophy in Latin America
First published Mon Oct 8, 2018; substantive revision Wed May 24, 2023
Analytic philosophy was introduced in Latin America in the
mid-twentieth century. Its development has been heterogeneous in
different countries of the region but has today reached a considerable
degree of maturity and originality, with a strong community working
within the analytic tradition in Latin America. This entry describes
the historical development of analytic philosophy in Latin America and
offers some examples of original contributions by Latin American
analytic philosophers.
1. Geographical and Theoretical Boundaries
2. Development of Analytic Philosophy in Latin America
2.1 Argentina (1940–1990)
2.2 Mexico (1940–1990)
2.3 Brazil (1930–1990)
2.4 Colombia (1965—)
2.5 Other Countries
2.5.1 Peru
2.5.2 Chile
2.5.3 Puerto Rico
2.5.4 Uruguay
2.5.5 Venezuela
2.5.6 Costa Rica
3. Original Contributions by Latin American Analytic Philosophers
3.1 Philosophy of Language and Mind
3.2 Applied Ethics, Bioethics, and Philosophy of Law
3.3 Metaphilosophy
4. Concluding Remarks
Bibliography
Special Issues and Symposia
Cited works
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Works Relevant to this Entry
Associations for Analytic Philosophy in Latin America
Other Latin American Institutions connected to Analytic Philosophy
Research Groups in Analytic Philosophy (in alphabetical order)
Journals Devoted to or Open to Analytic Philosophy in Latin America
Related Entries
1. Geographical and Theoretical Boundaries
This entry gives an overview of analytic philosophy
produced
in Latin America, not
about
Latin America. It covers
philosophical developments concerning diverse and universal problems
that are at the heart of Western philosophy. It focuses on
philosophers who have developed a large part of their research and
teaching practice in Latin American
 countries.
[
1
]
What is the scope of analytic philosophy? Analytic philosophy is not
restricted to the use of conceptual analysis (Ezcurdia 2015).
Following Rabossi (1975) and Sierra (1987), one could draw the
boundaries of analytic philosophy by focusing on some family traits: a
positive attitude toward scientific knowledge, a cautious attitude
toward metaphysics, a conception of philosophy as a conceptual task, a
close relationship between language and philosophy, a concern with
offering arguments to answer philosophical questions, and a search for
conceptual clarity.
It might be objected that non-analytic philosophy can also exhibit
these same traits. One can circumvent this problem by adding two
additional traits: a historical dimension (Glock 2008) and a
sociological dimension (Gracia 2010). Historically, analytic
philosophy has its roots in the works of authors such as Frege, Moore,
Russell, Wittgenstein, and the logical positivists, and it has been
pursued by subsequent authors like Anscombe, Ayer, Austin, Ryle,
Sellars, Strawson, Quine, Davidson, Barcan Marcus, and Kripke (the
“analytic canon”). Sociologically, the analytic tradition
is made up of several generations of people who enter advisor-student
and colleague-colleague relationships. They participate in shared
activities in which they recognize each other as members of the same
community, discuss and research similar topics using similar
approaches, and share a theoretical
 background.
[
2
]
Analytic philosophy as practiced in Latin America has two additional
traits. First, since analytic philosophy was introduced in Latin
America while other philosophical traditions were dominant, Latin
American analytic philosophy often deals with metaphilosophical issues
such as the nature of philosophy, its role in society, its relation to
other philosophical traditions, and the best ways of teaching it.
Second, given that analytic philosophy in Latin America has often
served the purposes of promoting change in conservative intellectual
institutions and social and political structures, several analytic
philosophers in Latin America have engaged politically in their home
countries.
2. Development of Analytic Philosophy in Latin America
This section describes the emergence and consolidation of communities
of analytic philosophers in various Latin American countries. For the
current purposes, an academic community is a group of people whose
members investigate common topics by following similar approaches and
engaging in dialogue with one another (Hurtado
 2007).
[
3
]
In Argentina, Mexico, and Brazil, there have been consolidated
analytic communities since the early 1990s. Colombia started late and
at a slow pace. However, it has seen a fast development over the last
few years and currently has a community that displays several features
of a consolidated community. Chile and Peru have taken important
measures to foster work in the analytic tradition that might lead to
the creation of strong analytic communities. In other countries, there
are either scattered efforts to promote analytic philosophy (Costa
Rica, Puerto Rico, Uruguay, Venezuela) or no clear signs of its
presence.
2.1 Argentina (1940–1990)
Analytic philosophy appeared in Argentina in the mid-forties in
small discussion groups outside the universities. In the mid-fifties,
it entered the universities and academic institutions in two different
areas almost simultaneously. On the one hand, mathematicians and
physicists interested in the foundations of mathematics and the
natural sciences introduced the logical developments of the early
twentieth century and the ideas of the logical positivists of the
Vienna Circle. On the other hand, lawyers and experts in the
foundations of law introduced formal developments and analytic tools
from ordinary language philosophy in their studies of legal language.
Those groups were connected from the beginning. During the 1960s and
1970s, the country faced a serious political crisis that compelled
many philosophers to either leave the country or develop their
activities within a new private institution (SADAF). With the recovery
of democracy in the 1980s, analytic philosophy returned to the
universities and other public institutions. It was in the 1980s that
the first Argentinian journal devoted to analytic philosophy appeared.
From the 1980s onwards, the overall quality and originality of
philosophical output increased, and analytic philosophy was settled
across the country.
The early reception of analytic philosophy took place from the
mid-1940s to the mid-1950s. In 1944, Mario Bunge founded
Minerva
, probably the first philosophy journal exclusively
devoted to philosophy in Latin America (Martí 1998;
Salmerón 1991a). In subsequent years, analytic philosophy was
also studied in various reading groups that gathered both supporters
and critics of analytic philosophy. From 1945 onwards, the members of
the
Grupo Argentino de la Academia Internacional de Historia y
Filosofía de la Ciencia
discussed Russell and Carnap
(Rabossi 1984). In 1952, two new groups emerged: a group hosted by the
Instituto Libre de Estudios Superiores
interested in logic
and philosophy of science and the
Círculo Filosófico
de Buenos Aires
led by Bunge. The creation of these two new
groups indicates the presence of a growing community of people
interested in philosophical analysis. It was in the
Círculo
that they discussed a manuscript of
Bunge’s
Causality: The Place of the Causal Principle in
Modern Science
—one of the first and most significant
analytic works published by a Latin American philosopher.
A few years later, analytic philosophy formally entered various
universities and other public institutions. In 1954, Carlos Cossio
organized a seminar on von Wright’s
An Essay in Modal
Logic
in the Faculty of Law and Social Sciences at the
Universidad de Buenos Aires. Familiarity with Tarski’s
Introduction to Logic and the Methodology of Deductive
Sciences
was a requirement for attending that seminar (Rabossi
1984). In 1956, Bunge took up the chair in philosophy of science in
the Philosophy Department at the Universidad de Buenos Aires. In 1957,
Gregorio Klimovsky took up the chair in logic.
During his almost ten years at the Universidad de Buenos Aires, Bunge
exerted firm opposition to the metaphysical trends emanating from
European philosophy and created
Cuadernos de
Epistemología
, a collection of translations of important
articles for students (Rabossi 1984). He also published
Antología semántica
, a comprehensive collection
of translations into Spanish of seminal texts from the analytic canon.
In 1965, Bunge decided to pursue his career abroad. Nevertheless, his
more than twenty years of intellectual activity in Argentina were key
to the development of analytic philosophy in the country (for further
information about Bunge’s role in Latin American philosophy of
science, see the entry
Philosophy of Science in Latin America
).
Klimovsky introduced axiomatic set theory and the debates concerning
the foundations of mathematics. Though Klimovsky published few papers,
his deep knowledge and enthusiasm for logic, the foundations of
mathematics, the methodology of natural sciences, the foundations of
psychoanalysis, and the history of science left a deep impression on
his
 students.
[
4
]
Some of them became the first generation of Argentinian analytic
philosophers. Two of them were crucial for the development of analytic
philosophy in the country: Thomas Moro Simpson and Félix
Schuster.
Simpson introduced philosophy of language as a discipline in
Argentina. He published
Formas lógicas, realidad y
significado
(1964), a very influential book in Latin America.
Indeed, Simpson taught that material at the
Instituto de
Investigaciones Filosóficas
(IIFs) in Mexico in 1967 and
the book was translated into Portuguese in
 1976.
[
5
]
In 1973, he published
Semántica filosófica
(1973), an anthology of translations of seminal works from the
analytic canon. Simpson’s students Raúl Orayen and
Alberto Moretti worked on logic, philosophy of logic, and philosophy
of language. Orayen focused on the philosophy of logic and language,
addressing problems raised by Russell, Frege, Quine, and Kripke. He is
best known for his formulation of “Orayen’s
paradox”, a paradox that arises when one tries to formulate a
model that captures the intended interpretation of the language for
set
 theory.
[
6
]
He worked in Argentina until the late 1970s and joined IIFs in 1982.
Once in Mexico, Orayen trained several analytic philosophers and wrote
his most significant contributions. The works from that period were
collected in
Lógica, significado y ontología
(1989).
[
7
]
Moretti specialized in Frege and studied Davidson’s philosophy
of language and Tarski’s theory of truth. He developed a view of
logic as a condition of possibility of language, reality, and thought.
Some of his most significant contributions are collected in
Interpretar y referir. Ejercicios de análisis
filosófico
(2008) and
En sayos analíticos
(2021).
Schuster made significant contributions to social philosophy. His book
Explicación y predicción: La validez del
conocimiento en ciencias sociales
(1982) is considered a classic
and has been reprinted numerous times. It examines the structure,
methodology, and predictive power of theories in the social
 sciences.
[
8
]
[
9
]
As indicated above, Cossio from the Faculty of Law at the Universidad
de Buenos Aires had organized a seminar on modal logic in 1954. In the
following years, he and his successor, Ambrosio Gioja continued those
 developments.
[
10
]
Some of their students became the founders of the analytic tradition
in the
 country.
[
11
]
Particularly relevant are Genaro
 Carrió
[
12
]
and Eduardo Rabossi, who were interested in the analysis of ordinary
language. Rabossi had wide-ranging interests. In
Análisis
filosófico, lenguaje y metafísica
(1975), he
introduced basic ideas from the analytic tradition into the
Spanish-speaking world. In ethics, his most influential book is
La
justificación moral del castigo
(1976). One of his most
important works,
En el comienzo Dios creó el canon
,
was published posthumously (2008) (See
Section 3.3
).
[
13
]
Among the first analytic philosophers trained in law school, there was
an alternative approach that applied formal tools to elucidate the
language of law. Especially noteworthy is Carlos Alchourrón and
Eugenio Bulygin’s
Normative Systems
(1971), a
pioneering book on deontic logic. The authors presented legal systems
as deductive systems and studied the logical asymmetries between the
processes of promulgation and abolition of
 laws.
[
14
]
Alchourrón’s aim was to develop a formal system that
avoided the introduction of inconsistencies in legal bodies. The
analogy with belief systems led him to focus on belief change,
producing the first formal paper on the dynamics of belief
(Alchourrón et al. 1985). The theory, known as AGM (by the
initials of the last names of its creators: Carlos Alchourrón,
Peter Gärdenfors, and David Makinson), has had a major impact
worldwide (for a presentation of Alchourrón and
collaborators’ work, see Arló-Costa and Fermé
(2009) and the entry
Logic of Belief Revision
).
[
15
]
One of the youngest members of this generation, Carlos Nino, played an
influential role in both philosophy and the institutional history of
Argentina. He made contributions to ethics, philosophy of law, and
constitutional
 theory.
[
16
]
Nino is also remembered for his political commitment to the recovery
of democracy in Argentina in the 1980s
 (
Section 3.2
introduces Nino’s work).
From the late 1960s to the 1970s, Argentina was hit by a political
crisis. In 1966, a
coup d’état
that led to a
military intervention in the universities compelled many philosophers
to resign their positions. Some emigrated to other countries, others
left the country for a couple of years, and still others tried to find
an alternative way of doing philosophy. Thus, shortly after, various
philosophers started to gather outside official circles in order to
continue their philosophical work. In 1972, they created SADAF
(
Sociedad Argentina de Análisis Filosófico
), an
association analogous to the
Aristotelian Society
that
initially organized talks and seminars (Rabossi
 1984).
[
17
]
In hindsight, SADAF made it possible to establish a unified community
of analytic philosophers. In addition to maintaining the spirit and
practice of analytic philosophy during the years in which it was
excluded from the public sphere (1966–1983), SADAF and its
members carried out three major tasks: 1) they trained young
generations within the analytic tradition; 2) they strengthened their
connections with analytic communities from other countries, mostly
IIFs in Mexico and the
Centro de lógica,
epistemología e história da ciência
in
Brazil; and 3) they created, in 1981,
Análisis
Filosófico
, the first journal exclusively devoted to
analytic philosophy in Argentina and the second one in Latin
 America.
[
18
]
Although analytic philosophy has developed for the most part in Buenos
Aires, there has been work in analytic philosophy in other cities
since the 1960s.
In Córdoba, Andrés Raggio was appointed chair of logic
(1956) and then of philosophy of science at the Universidad Nacional
de Córdoba. Ernesto Garzón Valdés was hired the
same year as a researcher at the
Instituto de Filosofía del
Derecho
at the same university. The political crisis compelled
them to leave the country in the 1970s. In the late 1980s, Alberto
Moreno and Rabossi helped develop analytic philosophy of language and
mind. Their student Carolina Scotto is nowadays the most established
researcher in those two
 areas.
[
19
]
She has also managed to build a solid research group that has made
contributions to those areas. From the early 1980s to the 1990s,
Horacio Faas focused on logic. During that same period, Víctor
Rodríguez worked in philosophy of science. For more than twenty
years, Rodríguez has organized the
Jornadas de
Epistemología e Historia de la Ciencia
, an annual meeting
open to analytic philosophy.
In the 1960s, Roberto Rojo introduced the works of Carnap,
Wittgenstein, and Quine at the Universidad Nacional de Tucumán
(Rabossi 1984).
In the early 1970s, research in logic developed at the Universidad
Nacional de La Plata with Carlos Lungarzo and Gladys Palau.
Unfortunately, both were compelled to resign in 1975. Nevertheless,
analytic philosophy returned to the university after the recovery of
democracy in 1983.
Despite the political and economic crisis, analytic philosophy started
to thrive in Argentina in the 1970s and it was firmly established by
the late 1980s. After the recovery of democracy in 1983, most of
SADAF’s founders returned to the Universidad de Buenos Aires,
where they found younger generations of students eager to be trained
in the analytic tradition. This first generation of analytic
philosophers mentored most analytic philosophers currently working in
Argentina and many Argentinian philosophers who have pursued their
careers abroad. Their influence also spread to other parts of the
country through the national university
 system.
[
20
]
2.2 Mexico (1940–1990)
Mexican analytic philosophy originated with a group of
philosophers trained in phenomenology, existentialism, the history of
philosophy, and influenced by Marxism. Their teachers were Spanish
philosophers who emigrated to Mexico in the late 1930s and the first
professional Mexican philosophers at
 UNAM.
[
21
]
Hence, the development of Mexican analytic philosophy is closely tied
to UNAM and, as will become clear, the Instituto de Investigaciones
Filosóficas (IIFs). Although analytic philosophy started to
spread to other Mexican institutions in the 1970s, IIFs remains the
main analytic center in the country. The first Mexican analytic
philosophers saw philosophical analysis as a critical tool to move
away from the European conceptions of philosophy they were familiar
with and as a methodological device to realize the phenomenological
ideal of philosophy as a rigorous science.
In
Positivismo, neopositivismo y fenomenología
(1941),
Antonio Caso compared logical positivism with nineteenth-century
positivism and phenomenology. Building on phenomenology and idealism,
he underlined the explanatory limits of the scientific method (Dussel
et al. 2009). In the mid-1950s, his student Nicolás Molina
defended logical positivism and started a project to translate some of
the main works from that
movement.
[
22
]
José Gaos was the most influential philosopher in Mexico from
1940 to 1960. He embraced a radical form of historicism: philosophy
consisted in a series of personal systems of the world that were
inextricably tied to the individual’s own circumstances (Valero
2012; Zirión 2021). Alejandro Rossi, one of his students,
thought of Gaos’ view as an extreme form of relativism that led
to skepticism about philosophy (Rossi 1970).
In 1959, Gaos and his students organized an event commemorating the
fifty years of the publication of Husserl’s book
Philosophy
as Rigorous Science
. Alejandro Rossi saw in Husserl’s work
a confrontation between Gaos’ historicist view of philosophy and
a view of philosophy as a rigorous science. Rossi also saw in the
analytic philosophy he had started to explore a way of turning
philosophy into a rigorous science (Rossi 1996). After the Husserl
event, Rossi went to Oxford in 1961, and got first-hand knowledge of
the latest developments in Oxonian philosophy.
When Rossi returned to UNAM, he taught philosophy of language. These
teaching activities enabled him to prepare a series of articles in
that area. Rossi examined definite descriptions like “The actual
king of France”, defending the Strawsonian view according to
which those who use definite descriptions
do not say
that
there is a unique king of France but presuppose it (Ezcurdia 2015). In
his article “Nombres propios”, Rossi anticipated some of
the problems of descriptivism underlined by Kripke (1980) and others
(Fernández and Valdés 2009). These and other articles
were later reprinted in
Lenguaje y significado
(1969).
[
23
]
[
24
]
The creation and development of IIFs played an important role in the
introduction and consolidation of analytic philosophy in Mexico.
Eduardo García Máynez—a philosopher of law trained
in phenomenology—was appointed as the dean of the Facultad de
Filosofía y Letras (FFyL) at UNAM in 1940. Shortly after, he
created the
Centro de Estudios Filosóficos
. In 1945,
the
Centro
became independent from FFyL and the governing
board of UNAM appointed García Máynez as its first
chair. García Máynez held that position for twenty
years. The
Centro
initially lacked an analytic orientation.
However, its autonomy from FFyL prepared the conditions for the
development of analytic philosophy in the 1970s. In the preceding
years, García Máynez worked on the creation of a
specialized library in philosophy, the first full-time research jobs
in philosophy, and an editorial
 program.
[
25
]
[
26
]
Fernando Salmerón followed García Máynez as a
chair of the
Centro
in early 1966. He stayed in office until
the end of 1977. Working in close collaboration with Rossi, he
promoted an analytic turn at the
Centro
, which acquired its
current name (
“Instituto de Investigaciones
Filosóficas”
) in
 1967.
[
27
]
Salmerón described the
Centro
in 1966 as a place that
was not conducive to intellectual collaboration. Its researchers did
not share any common topics, they differed dramatically in their
training, and they employed different methods (Salmerón 1978).
For Salmerón (1991a), philosophy is a collective endeavor that
requires a shared tradition, a common vocabulary, and the employment
of the same methods. Hence, Salmerón set himself the goal of
transforming the nascent IIFs into a space suitable for intellectual
collaboration. To that end, his administration pursued four
strategies. First, it trained undergraduate students in logic,
philosophy of science, and philosophy of language, and prepared them
to pursue postgraduate studies at analytic centers abroad (mostly in
Britain and the United States). Second, IIFs attracted renowned,
experienced researchers whose work was close to the analytic
tradition. In this way, local philosophers like Wonfilio Trejo and
Luis Villoro joined IIFs in 1974. Shortly after, three foreign
philosophers of science joined as well: Mario Otero, Mario Bunge, and
Ulises Moulines. Although most of them stayed at IIFs for short
periods of time, they left an important
 legacy.
[
28
]
Third, IIFs developed an ambitious program of visiting professors
with the aim of keeping the local community up to date with
contemporary debates. These visits were combined with the organization
of events with prominent analytic philosophers as keynote speakers.
Fourth, IIFs developed an ambitious editorial program to translate key
analytic works into Spanish. Salmerón’s work as chair of
IIFs consumed most of his middle age. Thus, his philosophical
contributions were heavily influenced by those endeavors. Some of his
best works are
La filosofía y las actitudes morales
(1971) and
Enseñanza y filosofía
(1991b).
[
29
]
Around 1964, Rossi had the idea of creating a philosophy journal
exclusively devoted to analytic philosophy. Salmerón and
Villoro joined him in that project. They dubbed it
Crítica
and conceived it as the first vehicle for
discussion amongst analytically oriented philosophers from all Latin
America and other continents. The first issue appeared in January
1967. Its editors did not see analytic philosophy as a specific
philosophical school. They rather saw it as a critical tool to oppose
prevalent philosophical trends and as an efficient method to develop
original philosophical work in Latin America. On their view,
philosophical analysis could elevate philosophy to a higher level of
professionalism because it would allow its practitioners to make clear
and precise claims and arguments (Salmerón 1991a).
With the end of Salmerón’s period in 1977 came the turn
for the analytic philosophers trained abroad to take the reins of
IIFs. Hugo Margáin came first. Unfortunately, he passed five
months after his appointment as chair. Widely perceived as one of the
brightest philosophers of his generation, he published several
articles from 1969 to 1977, collected in a posthumous book entitled
Racionalidad, lenguaje y filosofía
(1978). In that
book, Margáin defended a naturalist approach to rationality
(Salmerón 1991a).
Enrique Villanueva followed Margáin and stayed in office from
1978 to 1984. During that period, some iconic IIFs activities took
off: the
International Symposia of Philosophy
and the
Cátedra José Gaos
, a named lecture series
analogous to the
John Locke Lectures
at Oxford
(Benítez 2010). Villanueva also continued
Salmerón’s training program and hired many of IIFs
best-known researchers, such as Raúl Orayen and Mark
 Platts.
[
30
]
Between the 1970s and the 1980s, there was a quantitative and
qualitative growth in the production of analytic philosophy in Mexico
(Benítez 2010). The growth in academic output can be credited
to two generations: philosophers who had been trained in phenomenology
but became interested in analytic philosophy and the new generation of
analytic philosophers who had received training abroad. The list of
names is large, so just two examples will be
 considered.
[
31
]
Luis Villoro was trained in phenomenology but was interested in
analytic philosophy from the 1960s until the mid-1980s, studying
analytic authors like Ayer, Carnap, and Russell. However, he never
thought of analytic philosophy as an end in itself (Valdés and
Fernández 2009). He rather saw it as a means to reflect on
topics that were already present in his pre-analytic period but were
not part of the philosophical conversation in the analytic writings of
his time: the nature of ideology, the relations between knowledge and
social life, and the possibility of transforming social praxis.
Creer, saber, conocer
(1982) is the most analytic of
Villoro’s works. It offers a dispositional analysis of belief,
proposes a relativist solution to the Gettier problem, and defends a
pluralist view of knowledge with constitutive relations to practical
rationality. Although Villoro agreed with Rossi and Salmerón
that philosophical analysis was a good way of professionalizing
philosophy, he did not think of science as the only (or most
important) form of knowledge. In addition to
“saber”
, exemplified by scientific knowledge, he
valued
“sabiduría”
(a
sui generis
kind of wisdom that involves a form of truth defined in terms
authenticity rather than correspondence) and
“conocer”
(a form of acquaintance that relies on
personal experience and interpersonal relations). Villoro’s work
was one of the first attempts at developing a technical vocabulary in
Spanish for analytic
 epistemology.
[
32
]
Mark Platts is an example of a philosopher trained abroad. He
completed
Ways of Meaning
(1979) during his 1978 visit to
IIFs. In that book, he explained Davidson’s program of an
interpretation theory of truth capable of offering a theory of meaning
for a language and offered accounts of proper names, adjectives, and
natural kind terms. In 1984, Platts was appointed as a researcher at
IIFs. In close collaboration with Rossi’s students and Orayen,
Platts helped develop the area of philosophy of language. His works
from the 1980s and 1990s focused on desire (Platts 1985, 1986, 1994).
He also initiated a public debate on the ethical issues raised by the
AIDS epidemic.
With the appointment of León Olivé as chair in 1985,
IIFs entered an “expansion phase” (Benítez 2010).
Olivé worked towards making an impact on the cultural life of
the country and designed a graduate program in philosophy of
 science.
[
33
]
He also promoted the expansion of research areas (Benítez
2010) and made new appointments to support research in those areas.
Many of those hires did not self-identify as analytic. Hence, at the
end of Olivé’s period in the early 1990s, IIFs had
changed considerably.
It is not easy to square the works of all the philosophers who joined
IIFs during Olivé’s term as pieces of analytic
philosophy. However, Carlos Pereda’s work has analytic
overtones. Pereda has investigated the aims, motivations, types, and
mechanisms of argumentation. He has pleaded for a broad concept of
argumentation that goes beyond formal deduction and has used it to
develop a novel concept of reason. He has opposed an austere view of
reason as restricted to thoughts regimented by a formal calculus and
advocated for a reflective reason that admits figurative language and
probability, considers the history of concepts, and
who
says
something and
to whom
they say
 it.
[
34
]
In the 1990s, IIFs researchers had already made novel contributions to
a variety of topics, they had edited a prestigious journal devoted to
analytic philosophy, and IIFs attracted international students and
 researchers.
[
35
]
2.3 Brazil (1930–1990)
Brazilian analytic philosophy is the outgrowth of several
crisscrossing threads spanning a large territory. A logic thread led
to the development of a Brazilian school of logic centered around the
study of paraconsistent formal systems. Work in mathematical logic
started in the late 1920s and bloomed in the late 1970s.
Independently, starting in the 1940s, a philosophy thread introduced
themes from the analytic tradition into philosophy departments. This
thread was led by scholars trained in continental philosophy and the
history of philosophy who became interested in logical positivism,
logic, Wittgenstein, ordinary language philosophy, and the history and
philosophy of science. Although many of its members were not fully
committed to the analytic tradition, their writings engaged with
analytic authors. The logic and philosophy threads started to
intersect in the mid-1970s when philosophers increased their
interaction with mathematicians. Throughout the late 1970s and 1980s,
analytic philosophy expanded to many Brazilian states, leading to a
fragmentation of philosophical activity in Brazil. In the 1980s, there
were several initiatives to promote inter-state collaboration. The
integration started to bear fruit in the 1990s, so one can speak of a
Brazilian analytic community by the end of the 1990s.
In the first half of the twentieth century, scholastic philosophy was
cultivated in Brazil, so most work in logic focused on Aristotelian
syllogism and fallacies. However, there had been several attempts at
introducing mathematical logic in Brazil since the 1930s. Manuel
Amoroso Costa’s
As Idéias Fundamentais da
Matemática
(1929) included a chapter devoted to
mathematical logic. In 1940, Vicente Ferreira da Silva published
Elementos de Lógica Matemática
, the first book
exclusively devoted to mathematical logic in Latin America. In 1942,
Quine was invited to teach a one-semester course at the Universidade
de São Paulo (USP). His lectures gave rise to a book entitled
O Sentido da Nova Lógica
(1944). These three books had
little impact within philosophy circles.
From the late 1950s onwards, there were several groups of
mathematicians dedicated to the study of mathematical logic in
 Brazil.
[
36
]
Edson Farah in the Mathematics Department at USP led some seminars
dedicated to this topic (Hegenberg 1978). He also supervised two
important promoters of analytic philosophy in Brazil: Leônidas
Hegenberg and Newton da Costa.
Hegenberg played a key role in the dissemination of mathematical logic
and philosophy of science through his classes, textbooks, and
 translations.
[
37
]
Newton da Costa studied civil engineering and mathematics at the
Universidade Federal do Paraná (UFPR). Despite his lack of
formal training in philosophy, da Costa had studied philosophy on his
own since his
 teens.
[
38
]
In 1963, he defended a thesis to obtain the chair in Mathematical
Analysis and Higher Analysis of the Faculty of Philosophy, Science,
and Letters at UFPR. That thesis offered an analysis of three
paraconsistent logical systems, i.e., deductive systems that are
inconsistent albeit
 non-trivial.
[
39
]
Although da Costa was not the first to study paraconsistent systems,
he was the first to create several paraconsistent logical systems and
gather a research group with the explicit goal of investigating their
formal properties (Secco and Álvarez
 2022).
[
40
]
Da Costa’s research team became known as the “Curitiba
 group”.
[
41
]
He published some of his first results in the
Comptes rendus de
l’Académie des Sciences
de Paris. The first paper,
published in 1963, was the first research article in logic ever
published by a Brazilian author in an international outlet
(D’Ottaviano and Gomes 2011). Those publications put the
international spotlight on da Costa’s work, started to establish
a Brazilian school of logic, and contributed to the development of
paraconsistent logics as a topic of global
 interest.
[
42
]
In 1964, a
coup d’état
led the members of the
Curitiba group to migrate to São Paulo. Da Costa joined the
Institute of Mathematics, Statistics and Computer Science (IMECC) at
the Universidade Estadual de Campinas (Unicamp) in 1968 and the
Institute of Mathematics and Statistics (IME) at USP in
 1970.
[
43
]
Da Costa’s first and most prominent PhD student, Ayda Ignez
Arruda, created her own research group at IMECC (D’Ottaviano and
Gomes 2011). Both groups developed joint projects and published many
joint articles. They also promoted the organization of events that
contributed to the integration of logicians from all Latin America and
other parts of the world. The growth of that community of logicians
led to the creation of the
Sociedade Brasileira de
Lógica
(SBL) in
 1979.
[
44
]
The philosophical thread also starts at USP. Since its foundation in
1934, USP had invited many foreign intellectuals to join the nascent
university. Many of them came from France, forming the so-called
“French legion”. They implemented a structuralist approach
to the history of philosophy that shaped the way in which the first
and second generations of USP professional philosophers understood
philosophy (Costa 2021). Gilles-Gaston Granger worked at USP from 1947
to 1953 and returned to Brazil on several occasions. During his stay
at USP, Granger taught logic and philosophy of science. A few years
later, he published those lectures in book format as
Lógica
e Filosofia das Ciências
(1955). Although the book offered
an overview of the most recent developments in logic and philosophy of
science, Granger also promoted the structuralist approach (Costa
2021). Hence, it is no accident that the first Brazilian philosophers
who engaged with analytic authors approached philosophy from a
historical-structuralist perspective.
José Giannotti—a student of Granger—became a
professor at USP in 1959. Although he initially taught symbolic logic,
he soon became interested in Marx. In his famous book
Origens da
dialética do trabalho
(1966), Giannotti offered a
sui
generis
interpretation of the antagonism between capital and
labor as a verbal game. In the following years, he studied
Wittgenstein’s philosophy (Hegenberg 1978) and published, in
1968, the first Portuguese translation of Wittgenstein’s
Tractatus
 Logico-Philosophicus
.
[
45
]
At the end of his career, he published a long book that compared
Heidegger’s and Wittgenstein’s attitudes towards language
(Giannotti
 2018).
[
46
]
Oswaldo Porchat studied at USP and Rennes and taught at USP. In his
famous lecture
O Conflito das Filosofias
(1969), Porchat
argued that each philosopher faces a “conflict of
philosophies”: different philosophical systems provide
incompatible answers to philosophical questions about the world.
Lacking an answer to that challenge, he abandoned philosophy and
devoted himself to the study of mathematical logic during a stay at UC
Berkeley (Smith 2018). Porchat returned to USP in 1970 and taught
advanced mathematical logic and philosophy of science. Those courses
had a great impact on his students. He also regained interest in
philosophy and led a research group dedicated to modal logic
(Hegenberg 1978). After publishing a polemical article against
historicism in philosophy of science (Porchat 1974), Porchat explored
two different solutions to the conflict of philosophies: a commonsense
solution that relied on key works from the analytic canon such as
Moore and Strawson, and a skeptical solution inspired by an innovative
interpretation of Ancient Greek skepticism (especially Sextus
Empiricus), and building on the work of Quine and Ryle, and
philosophers of science such as Popper and Lakatos. The result is
called “neo-Pyrrhonism” (Porchat
 2006).
[
47
]
After his stay at UC Berkeley, Porchat envisioned creating a center
analogous to UC Berkeley’s
Group in Logic and Methodology of
Science
. His initiative faced political resistance at USP, so he
took his project to Unicamp (D’Ottaviano and Gomes 2011). The
Centro de Lógica, Epistemologia e História da
Ciência
(CLE) was finally born in 1977. Its main goal was
to promote research in logic, epistemology, philosophy of science, and
interdisciplinary studies. It initially focused on the organization of
seminars and scientific meetings, the promotion of academic exchanges
with other groups and institutions in Brazil and abroad, and the
publication of periodicals and books (D’Ottaviano and Gomes
2011). Many participants in the logic thread joined CLE either as
permanent or associated members. There was also a group dedicated to
the philosophy of natural sciences (such as physics and biology),
another group devoted to the philosophy of human sciences (psychology,
psychoanalysis, and sociology), and a few members interested in
philosophy of mind and philosophy of language (D’Ottaviano,
Carnielli and Alves
 1996).
[
48
]
CLE created different journals. Porchat founded
Manuscrito
in
1978, which later became one of the main outlets for analytic
philosophy in Latin
 America.
[
49
]
Zeljko Loparić created
Cadernos de História e
Filosofia da Ciência
in 1980. The
Journal of
Non-Classical Logics
followed in
 1982.
[
50
]
In 1987, CLE started to publish books on logic, history of
philosophy, and epistemology and methodology of science. Until the
early 2000s, CLE contributed to the development of specialized courses
and a graduate program in logic and philosophy of science at the
Philosophy Department of Unicamp. That program trained many subsequent
generations of analytic philosophers from Brazil and other Latin
American countries. Since its creation, CLE has played a decisive role
in gathering Brazilian and Latin American philosophers and
internationalizing Brazilian work in logic and analytic
philosophy.
There were other philosophical developments roughly contemporaneous
with those from São Paulo in other states. For reasons of
space, only a few developments in Rio de Janeiro will be
mentioned.
Euryalo Cannabrava published
Elementos de Metodologia
Filosófica
and
Introdução à
Filosofia Científica
in 1956 and
Ensaios
Filosóficos
in 1957. Those books presented hitherto
unfamiliar ideas from the analytic canon. Other philosophers from Rio
also showed an early interest in Frege, the second Wittgenstein, and
ordinary language philosophy. Paulo Alcoforado worked at the
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ) from 1963 to 1998.
Although most of his work was in the history of philosophy, he
translated into Portuguese some works by Frege in the late 1970s and
Simpson’s
Formas lógicas, realidad y significado
in 1976. In 1980, he also published an introductory article to
ordinary language philosophy that helped develop a tradition of work
in ordinary language philosophy in Rio. Mario Guerreiro joined UFRJ in
1978. He taught theory of knowledge, philosophy of language, and
metaphysics. He wrote about common sense, Wittgenstein, and skepticism
(Guerreiro 1999). Guido Antônio de Almeida worked at the
Pontifícia Universidade Católica de Rio de Janeiro
(PUC-RJ) from 1972 to 1981. Trained in Husserl’s phenomenology,
he taught graduate classes on speech acts and the second Wittgenstein.
Daniel Vanderveken, an expert on speech acts, also visited Rio during
those years (Hegenberg
 1978).
[
51
]
In the 1970s, analytic philosophy started to spread throughout the
country. At least two factors explain this phenomenon. First, many
graduate programs of philosophy were created in Brazil in the 1970s
(Brito 2008). Second, the number of scholarships to pursue
postgraduate studies in Brazil and abroad increased dramatically from
the early 1970s to the late 1990s (Mazza
 2009).
[
52
]
Many Brazilian philosophers benefited from those public policies.
The expansion of analytic philosophy took many forms. Many Brazilians
received training at analytic centers abroad and introduced topics
from the analytic tradition at various Brazilian
 universities.
[
53
]
Philosophers trained in the São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro
groups moved to other states and promoted work in analytic
 philosophy.
[
54
]
Foreign professors with training in analytic philosophy also joined
Brazilian
 universities.
[
55
]
As a result, many analytic groups started to emerge at various
Brazilian universities from the early 1980s
 onwards.
[
56
]
This expansion led to a fragmentation of philosophical activity in
Brazil. In response, several initiatives emerged to integrate the
dozens of philosophers scattered throughout the Brazilian territory.
The
Associação Nacional de
Pós-Graduação em Filosofia
(ANPOF) was
created in 1983. ANPOF sought to prevent the isolation of researchers
and maintain a continuous dialogue amongst philosophers from different
states. It started to organize biennial philosophy meetings structured
around
grupos de trabalho
(GTs), i.e., working groups that
gather senior and young researchers interested in common topics. GTs
offered young researchers the opportunity to be mentored by senior
researchers from different states and develop a network across the
 country.
[
57
]
Many new philosophy journals have appeared since the 1990s. To be
sure, few of those journals are exclusively devoted to analytic
philosophy. However, many of them regularly accept submissions of
analytic works. Their openness to analytic contributions suggests
that, at least since the 1990s, analytic philosophy was normalized
throughout the country.
In the 1990s and early 2000s, several national meetings in analytic
philosophy took place that led to the creation of the
Sociedade
Brasileira de Filosofia Analítica
(SBFA) in 2008 (Brito
 2008).
[
58
]
2.4 Colombia (1965—)
Analytic philosophy has taken time to flourish in Colombia.
However, some analytic authors became part of the philosophical canon
at several universities by the end of the twentieth century. For a
long time, Colombian philosophers saw analytic philosophy either as an
object of study or as a resource to provide argumentative
reconstructions of classical authors. Hence, many Colombian
philosophers whose work has analytic traits are reluctant to
self-identify as analytic philosophers; they are happy to move freely
between different intellectual traditions. The newer generations are
more willing to call themselves “analytic philosophers”,
perhaps due to their earlier exposure to analytic philosophy and their
training at centers of analytic philosophy abroad.
An early appearance of analytic philosophy can be found in a 1964
article by Carlos B. Gutiérrez that criticizes
Wittgenstein’s solipsism from a phenomenological perspective.
After him, Rubén Sierra, another philosopher trained in
phenomenology, adopted a more sympathetic approach. From the 1970s to
the mid-1980s, Sierra discussed the works of Russell, Frege, Carnap,
Austin, Popper, and Strawson in lectures in the Philosophy Department
at the Universidad Nacional de Colombia in Bogotá (UNAL). He
also translated some analytic texts and published several articles. In
his works, he treated analytic philosophy as an exotic object that had
to be introduced and commented upon before it could be assimilated by
his Colombian
 readership.
[
59
]
Still in the late 1980s, Sierra described himself as a traditional
and speculative philosopher who valued the clarity and argumentative
rigor of analytic philosophy. After 1985, Sierra changed the course of
his intellectual efforts: he tried to reconstruct the fragmentary
tradition of Colombian thought to make it available to human and
social scientists. Sierra is today better known for those
endeavors.
The situation of analytic philosophy started to change in the 1980s
thanks to the work of Madgalena Holguín, Adolfo León
Gómez, and Juan José Botero.
After a PhD at Columbia University, Holguín joined the
Philosophy Department at UNAL in 1981. She stayed there until 1992.
During those years, Holguín gained a reputation as the first
truly analytic philosopher in the country. She introduced
Wittgenstein’s philosophy in her classes, supervised many theses
on that topic, published a few translations of analytic texts, and
wrote a few articles on Wittgenstein’s philosophy. Her main
contribution is her book
Wittgenstein y el escepticismo
. In
that text, she offers an interpretation of
On Certainty
as
providing a “therapeutic dissolution” of skepticism. On
her reading, Wittgenstein holds that the skeptical problematic
originates from our misunderstanding of the contrasts between
appearance and reality, the subjective and the objective, the internal
and the external, and the private and the public. Holguín
exerted great influence on analytic and non-analytic philosophers
 alike.
[
60
]
While Holguín was active in Bogotá, Gómez was the
main representative of analytic philosophy at Universidad del Valle in
Cali. He was active there from the late 1970s to the early 2000s.
Gómez tried to develop a comprehensive understanding of speech
acts inspired by Austin and Searle. He combined that account with
Perelman’s theory of argumentation, insisted on the primacy of
practical reason over formal logic, and explored the ramifications of
that framework in the legal, ethical, and literary domains
(Gómez 1991, 1997a, 1997b). Although Gómez was a pioneer
of philosophy in Colombia, he did not leave many
 students.
[
61
]
From the late 1980s to the late 1990s, analytic philosophy slowly
became part of the philosophical canon at UNAL. Moreover, the
production of analytic works grew considerably. It is also during that
period that we find the first analytic works that moved away from
exegesis to the study of philosophical problems themselves
(Rodríguez 2002). In a paper from 1987, Juan José
Botero, a phenomenologist by training, argued that one should study
sense, not by focusing on linguistic meaning, but on the constitutive
role of mental
 states.
[
62
]
This and other works opened the door to philosophy of mind in
Colombia, one of the most-developed analytic areas in the country.
Analytic philosophy was established at UNAL throughout the 1990s.
Several philosophers contributed to this development.
In the early 1990s, Jaime Ramos, Raúl Meléndez,
Alejandro Rosas, and Luis Eduardo Hoyos joined UNAL’s Philosophy
Department. Ramos and Botero created a research group in philosophy of
mind. Ramos had worked on cognitivist philosophy of mind, but
subsequently focused on Wittgenstein and social philosophy. One of his
most significant articles used Wittgenstein’s remarks on
seeing-as to provide an account of mental phenomena as having three
mutually irreducible aspects: physical, psychological, and social
(Ramos 2001). Meléndez, a mathematician by training, pursued
the tradition of Wittgenstein scholarship initiated by Holguín.
However, he focused on topics like truth and the philosophy of
 mathematics.
[
63
]
Contrary to Ramos and Meléndez, Rosas and Hoyos started their
careers as Kant scholars. Analytic philosophy featured in their work
as a tool to provide analytic reconstructions of Kant’s
philosophy. Rosas defended a reading of Kant’s transcendental
philosophy inspired by Strawson (Rosas
 1996).
[
64
]
Hoyos wrote a pioneering work on the skeptical reception of
Kant’s philosophy. He argued that the skeptical debates of the
late eighteenth century in Germany anticipated subsequent themes and
arguments from Ayer, Moore, Strawson, and Stroud (Hoyos
 2001).
[
65
]
The arrival of Ignacio Ávila, William Duica, and Adrian Cussins
at the turn of the twentieth century gave analytic philosophy at UNAL
a new boost. Much of Ávila’s work has focused on a
Kantian theme: the constitutive links between objectivity,
subjectivity, and spatiality. Contrary to Rosas and Hoyos,
Ávila has pursued his work in dialogue with contemporary
philosophy of perception (Ávila 2014, 2015). Duica has made
contributions to epistemology, notably the realism/anti-realism debate
and relativism from a Davidsonian perspective (Duica 2014). In the
early 1990s, Cussins developed a theory of non-conceptual content that
established a constitutive link between perceptual experience and
action (Cussins 1990, 1992). Since Cussins’ arrival in Colombia
in the 2000s, his theory has had a great impact on a new generation of
analytic
 philosophers.
[
66
]
The Universidad de Los Andes started to gain prominence as a center
for analytic philosophy in the early 2010s. After joining the
Philosophy Department in 2002, Andrés Páez sought to
institutionalize the teaching of logic and consolidate a group in
analytic
 philosophy.
[
67
]
Páez has been a pioneer in legal epistemology and the
philosophy of AI in the region (Páez 2009, 2014, 2019). With
Carlos Cardona from Universidad El Rosario, he organizes
PHILOGICA
, a series of international conferences that have
contributed to the training of students. Santiago Amaya has managed to
attract international funding to consolidate a community around the
philosophy of action and moral psychology, organizing international
workshops and summer schools. This group has trained a new generation
of philosophers that have pursued their careers abroad.
While there is no journal exclusively devoted to analytic philosophy
in Colombia, well-established venues like
Ideas y Valores
(Bogotá),
Praxis Filosófica
(Cali), and
Estudios de Filosofía
(Medellín) regularly
publish papers in the analytic
 tradition.
[
68
]
2.5 Other Countries
2.5.1 Peru
Analytic philosophy was introduced by Francisco Miró Quesada
and Augusto Salazar Bondy at the Universidad Nacional Mayor de San
Marcos in
 Lima.
[
69
]
In 1946, Miró Quesada published one of the first textbooks of
mathematical logic in Latin America. In subsequent work, he offered a
formal analysis of the concept of understanding. He thought of
philosophy as having two sides: a systematic side that seeks to
develop theories and a critical side that connects philosophy with
social
 life.
[
70
]
In the 1980s, Miró Quesada and Alberto Cordero created a
philosophy program at the Universidad Cayetano de Heredia with a
strong concentration in philosophy of science (Valdés and
Fernández
 2009).
[
71
]
Salazar Bondy published translations of Moore and Wittgenstein in 1961
and, since the mid-1960s, a series of articles on evaluative language,
collected in his book
Para una filosofía del valor
(1971).
[
72
]
Subsequently, Salazar Bondy advocated for the liberation of Latin
American countries (Valdés and Fernández 2009) and
joined a national committee to reform Peruvian education
(Salmerón 1991a).
From 1963 to 1987, Edgar Guzmán Jorquera worked at the
Universidad Nacional de San Agustín. He defended the view that
existence is a predicate and tried to reconcile Tarski’s
disquotational theory of truth with a correspondence theory of truth.
His papers were collected in a posthumous, two-volume book entitled
Existencia y realidad
(2002) (Quintanilla 2003).
Apart from these isolated philosophers who left no students, it is
only in the twentieth-first century that one finds a nascent analytic
community at two institutions in Peru. At the Pontificia Universidad
Católica del Perú, Pablo Quintanilla is the head of an
interdisciplinary group dedicated to the philosophies of language and
mind (
Grupo Mente y Lenguaje
). Víctor Krebs has
conducted research on Wittgenstein and aesthetics. More recently,
Eduardo Villanueva has focused on philosophy of language and
philosophy of
 logic.
[
73
]
At the Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, a small group led by
Oscar García Zárate created the
Centro de estudios
de filosofía analítica
(CESFIA) in 2006. CESFIA
edits the journal
Analítica
.
2.5.2 Chile
In Chile, there has been a steady interest in mathematical logic since
the 1940s (Gracia 1984). Juan Rivano introduced symbolic logic in 1955
and Gerold Stahl developed the area in the 1960s (Stahl 1956, 1960).
Rolando Chuaqui is, however, the most influential logician from Chile.
In Chuaqui (1965), he offered a novel interpretation of probability
based on the concepts of possibility and logical
 truth.
[
74
]
Roberto Torretti made an early impact with a well-regarded book on
Kant published in 1967. At that time, he also showed some interest in
analytic philosophy. He published review articles of Quine’s
From a Logical Point of View
and Ayer’s
Logical
Positivism
and two articles on Wittgenstein (Torretti 1961,
1968). Alfonso Gómez Lobo—who had studied with Ernst
Tugendhat in Germany—published a translation of texts by Frege
in 1972. Gómez Lobo and Torretti were exiled to the United
States and Puerto Rico respectively.
From the 1980s to the 1990s, there were only a couple of researchers
devoted to analytic philosophy in
 Chile.
[
75
]
It is noteworthy, however, that Ernst Tugendhat was a visiting
professor at the Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile from
1992 to 1996. During that time, he also gave many talks and lectures
in other Latin American countries. These visits led to several
translations of his works into Spanish that influenced the development
of analytic philosophy in the Andean
 countries.
[
76
]
In the twenty-first century, analytic philosophy in Chile has grown
considerably. Many philosophers from younger generations have
completed graduate studies abroad and joined Chilean universities
afterwards. Some of these philosophers are Eduardo Fermandois
(philosophy of language, Wittgenstein,
 metaphilosophy),
[
77
]
Wilfredo Quezada (logic, philosophy of mathematics), Andrés
Bobenrieth (paraconsistent logics, logical pluralism, philosophy of
law), José Tomás Alvarado (metaphysics), Claudia
Muñoz (philosophy of mind), Francisco Pereira (Hume,
perception,
 consciousness),
[
78
]
and Pablo López-Silva (philosophy of mind, philosophy of
psychiatry). The recent growth of Chilean analytic philosophy is
reflected in the organization of the
Jornadas Rolando Chuaqui
Kettlun
and the colloquium
Lenguaje y
Cognición
.
2.5.3 Puerto Rico
Ludwig Schajowicz, an Austrian student of Karl Bühler and Moritz
Schlick, joined the Universidad de Puerto Rico as a visiting professor
in 1947. Shortly after, he contributed to creating the Philosophy
Department and the graduate program in philosophy. He also founded the
journal
Diálogos
in
 1964.
[
79
]
Roberto Torretti joined the Universidad de Puerto Rico in 1970 and
worked there until his retirement. During his Puerto Rican phase, he
wrote his two landmark studies in the history and philosophy of
science:
Philosophy of Geometry from Riemann to
Poincaré
(1978) and
Relativity and Geometry
(1983).
[
80
]
Torretti also became the editor of
Diálogos
,
transforming it into one of the most prestigious journals in the
continent (Dussel et al. 2009; Salmerón 1991a). Some members of
the Philosophy Department at the Universidad de Puerto Rico have
pursued work in the analytic
 tradition.
[
81
]
2.5.4 Uruguay
Although Carlos Vaz Ferreira is not clearly an analytic
 philosopher,
[
82
]
he influenced Latin American analytic philosophy in two ways. First,
his broad understanding of logic has had a late impact in the work of
several Uruguayan philosophers with an analytic bent. Prominent
examples are Carlos Pereda and Eduardo Piacenza (Piacenza 2015).
Second, Vaz Ferreira promoted the creation of the Faculty of
Humanities and Sciences at the Universidad de la República in
1946, where analytic philosophy developed a few years later. From 1953
to 1974, Ezra Heymann—a Kant scholar—introduced Frege and
Austin, and taught logic at the Universidad de la
 República.
[
83
]
During that same period, Mario Otero, who had previously spent some
time at the University at Buffalo in New York, went to Buenos Aires to
write a PhD thesis under Mario Bunge’s supervision, and then
continued his postgraduate studies in Paris and the United States,
where he worked with Quine and Putnam. Otero went into exile in Mexico
from 1974 to 1980, where he contributed to the development of
philosophy of science at IIFs and Universidad Autónoma
Metropolitana-Iztapalapa. With the return of democracy, Otero went
back to Uruguay, and focused on the history of logic and philosophy of
science. His student Lucía Leiwowicz has pursued the same line
of research. Also exiled in the 1970s, never to return to Uruguay,
were Javier Sasso, Eduardo Piacenza, and Carlos Pereda. Sasso and
Piacenza went to Venezuela and Pereda to IIFs (for further details,
see
Section 2.5.5
and
Section 2.2
).
Currently, the most prominent philosopher in Uruguay is Carlos Enrique
Caorsi, who has worked in philosophy of language with an emphasis on
Davidson’s philosophy. There is also a new generation of
philosophers based at the Universidad de la República working
in philosophy of mind, cognitive science, deep disagreement,
rationality, and scientific change. They include Victoria Lavorerio
and Ignacio Cervieri. With Pablo Melogno, they created the
Grupo
de Estudios Sociales de la Ciencia y la Tecnología
(GESCyT).
2.5.5 Venezuela
In the 1940s, Juan David García Bacca received an invitation to
create the School of Philosophy at the Universidad Central de
Venezuela, the first center for the professional study of philosophy
in the country (Dussel et al. 2009). The school started its activities
in 1946. García Bacca, though not an analytic philosopher
himself, taught mathematical logic, philosophy of science, and
introduced some authors from the analytic tradition. García
Bacca stayed there until his retirement in 1971.
Juan Nuño, one of García Bacca’s students, wrote
some analytic
 works.
[
84
]
In 1965, he published
Sentido de la filosofía
contemporánea
(1965), where he offered an interpretation
of Marxism and logical empiricism as transformative movements. Like
his Argentinian and Mexican peers, Nuño saw analytic philosophy
as a means to steer philosophy in the direction of a coherent and
scientific investigation, and as a critical activity, opposing the
construction of closed, philosophical
 systems.
[
85
]
In the 1970s, Nuño was chair of the School of Philosophy.
During those years, he and his colleagues founded a graduate program
in logic and philosophy of science (1975), the journal
Semestre de
filosofía
(1977), and the
Asociación Venezolana
de Epistemología
(1979).
In the 1970s, several Uruguayan philosophers emigrated to Venezuela:
Ezra Heymann, Ernesto Battistella, Eduardo Piacenza, and Javier Sasso.
Battistella published logic textbooks, and
Selección de
textos de Gottlob Frege
(1971). He endorsed a view of philosophy
as a critical activity and gave logic a central role as an instrument
to clarify our imprecise concepts (Ramis 1978). Since the 1990s, there
has been a group of philosophers that still focus on mathematical
logic, set theory, and the foundations of
 mathematics.
[
86
]
Piacenza taught formal logic at different universities in Carabobo
and Caracas. In the late 1980s, he moved away from formal logic, and
focused on argumentation
 theory.
[
87
]
While he was working at Universidad Católica Andrés
Bello, he created
Cuadernos Venezolanos de Filosofía
in 1989 and co-founded an MA program in philosophy. He also created a
research group dedicated to the study of argumentation theory and
informal logic. That group is still
 active.
[
88
]
Sasso worked at various Venezuelan universities before being
appointed at Universidad Simón Bolívar, where he worked
from 1988 to 1997. He regularly taught Moore, Russell, Wittgenstein,
Ryle, Strawson, and other analytic philosophers. He was chair of the
Philosophy Department and the editor-in-chief of
Revista
Venezolana de Filosofía
from 1993 to 1997. He combined his
analytic orientation with an interest in the history of Latin American
 philosophy.
[
89
]
Vicenzo Lo Monaco studied with García Bacca, Nuño,
Heymann, and Battistella. He has published articles and books in
logic, philosophy of language, methodology, and philosophy of science.
His work in philosophy of language focuses on Davidson’s
philosophy, proper names, and ontological commitment. He re-founded
the journal
Episteme NS
in 1983, which progressively turned
analytic. From the same generation, Pedro Lluveres worked on the
history of science and philosophy. He wrote a fine book entitled
Ciencia y escepticismo. Aproximaciones a Descartes
(1976).
Since the 1990s, there has been a group that conducts research in
mathematical logic and set theory. It originates with Carlos di
Prisco, a mathematician from the Universidad Central de Venezuela. His
student Franklin Galindo introduced first-order logic and its
metatheory and various trends in philosophy of mathematics in the
Philosophy Department at the same university. Galindo’s students
have pursued this line of research as
 well.
[
90
]
[
91
]
2.5.6 Costa Rica
At the Universidad de Costa Rica, two analytic philosophers are worth
mentioning: Claudio Gutiérrez and Luis Camacho.
Gutiérrez developed most of his work from the late 1960s to the
late 1980s. He published mostly in logic, but also in epistemology,
philosophy of science, and AI (Gutiérrez 1974, 1982). Luis
Camacho published reviews and articles on Wittgenstein and
epistemology in the 1970s. Max Freund, from the next generation, has
worked on the logics of sortals, modal logic, and on the logical,
computational, and philosophical consequences of conceptualism (Freund
1992, 2001, 2018). He has also contributed to the development of the
graduate program in cognitive science.
There are almost no visible traces of analytic philosophy
in Latin American countries not mentioned in this historical
 survey.
[
92
]
Their political, historical, and economic circumstances might explain
this absence. Some of those countries have endured the effects of
civil wars, dictatorships, and depressed economies. Under those
circumstances, the study of philosophy in any of its forms is not the
first priority.
3. Original Contributions by Latin American Analytic Philosophers
Section 2
approached Latin American analytic philosophy from a historical
perspective. This section presents some original contributions by
analytic philosophers working in the region regardless of any
diachronic considerations. It discusses three types of original
contributions: novel contributions to academic debates, novel
contributions to the public sphere, and autochthonous research
avenues. Novel contributions to academic debates include either
uncommon but interesting claims that challenge entrenched views in
international scholarship, or defenses of more traditional claims from
unusual perspectives.
Section 3.1
presents some instances from the philosophies of language and mind.
Novel contributions to the public sphere comprise applications of
analytic tools to address moral and political issues that are tied to
the sociopolitical circumstances of Latin American countries. Applied
ethics, bioethics, and philosophy of law are three areas where this
form of originality can be found
 (
Section 3.2
).
 Finally, autochthonous research avenues refer to debates that
originated in Latin America and could have a significant impact
worldwide.
Section 3.3
offers some examples from metaphilosophy.
For reasons of space, the following discussion is limited in three
ways. First, it does not cover some areas of analytic philosophy that
either are insufficiently represented in the region (metaphysics) or
are already covered by other entries (epistemology, logic, philosophy
of science, political philosophy) (see the entries
Philosophy of Science in Latin America
,
Epistemology in Latin America
,
Skepticism in Latin America
,
 and
Liberalism in Latin America
).
 Second, it does not offer an exhaustive selection of contributions.
The aim is to present a small but representative sample. The
interested reader can find references to other significant
contributions in the footnotes. Third, it does not critically assess
the merits of each contribution. Instead, it provides sufficient
information to show why each contribution is worthy of
consideration.
3.1 Philosophy of Language and Mind
Many Latin American analytic philosophers have joined the
referentialist movement that started with Barcan Marcus, Donnellan,
Putnam, Kripke, Kaplan, and others.
A key question for that movement concerns reference fixing: How do
(uses of) linguistic expressions come to have the conventional
referents they have? Gómez-Torrente has offered accounts of
reference fixing for widely discussed terms like definite descriptions
(Gómez-Torrente 2015), proper names, demonstratives, and nouns
for natural kinds (Gómez-Torrente 2019) and less discussed
terms like Arabic numerals, color adjectives (Gómez-Torrente
2019), and quotations (Gómez-Torrente 2013, 2017). His starting
point is a conception of human endeavors according to which
“truth is something we pursue and very often achieve”
(Gómez-Torrente 2019, 9). Since truth depends on successful
reference, a theory of reference should ensure that, in some central
areas of discourse, our (uses of) linguistic expressions successfully
refer. To this end, one should think of the theory of reference as
intertwined with metaphysics and epistemology. Metaphysically, one
should not think of the referents of referential expressions as
peculiar and inaccessible entities. Epistemically, one should only
posit reference-fixing conventions that humans can plausibly follow.
Although shared reference-fixing conventions play a role in the
explanation of communication, one should not construe (many of) them
as descriptive senses. Rather than trying to offer necessary and
sufficient conditions that fix the reference of any possible use of an
expression, one should settle for conventions that provide roughly
sufficient conditions for reference that work for some central uses
and leave less central uses
 indeterminate.
[
93
]
Marco Ruffino has made another contribution to the referentialist
movement. Kripke (1980) famously argued that his views on proper names
made room for contingent truths that are a priori knowable. Let
“
S
” be a particular stick used to conventionally
establish what we call “meter” and
“
t
0
” the time at which the convention
was established. Consider now an utterance of (M):
(M)
The length of
S
at
t
0
is one meter
long.
For Kripke, (M) expresses a contingent truth because
S
could
be longer or shorter than it actually is. And it is a priori knowable
because the baptizer only needs to know the convention expressed by
“the length of
S
at
t
0
”—with no reliance on experience. A
problem for Kripke’s view arises when one asks a metaphysical
question: If (M) refers to an independently existing truth-maker, how
could one possibly know it a priori? Ruffino (2022) has tried to meet
this challenge by taking seriously the idea that many contingent a
priori truths arise from stipulations. Building on speech-act theory,
Ruffino submits that cases like (M) originate from a specific type of
speech act that creates its own truth-maker. Consider a priest’s
utterance of “I declare you husband and wife”. If
successful, this declarative illocutionary act (Searle and Vanderveken
1985) “automatically creates an alignment between word and world
[…] because the act itself brings about a new fact that
verifies it” (Ruffino 2022, 161). Since this new fact does not
exist independently of the stipulation, there is no mystery as to how
it could be known a
 priori.
[
94
]
Referential views like Gómez-Torrente’s and
Ruffino’s face a problem: many of the expressions whose
reference they have tried to elucidate have non-referential uses. This
problem has led many authors to reject the traditional view of proper
names, indexicals, and demonstratives as referential expressions. For
example, some authors have argued that complex demonstratives are
quantificational phrases (King 2000; Neale 2008; Lepore and Ludwig
2000), and others have claimed that proper names are common nouns or
predicates (Burge 1973; Fara 2015). Ezcurdia (2017, 2022) develops a
referential view that tackles the problem of non-referential uses.
According to her
referential functionalism
, what makes an
expression referential is its
function
. More specifically,
e
is a referential expression just in case
e
has the
function of communicating singular thoughts. On Ezcurdia’s view,
this function explains why humans still employ proper names,
indexicals, and demonstratives. Given that a function can go
unfulfilled, referential expressions can have non-referential uses as
well. Ezcurdia’s referential functionalism has two consequences:
referential expressions are systematically ambiguous, and a
semantically complex expression like “that taco” can be
genuinely
 referential.
[
95
]
Slurs have also featured in recent Latin American philosophy of
language. A slur like “spic” is a word that conveys
derogatory feelings for members of a certain group of people. Orlando
and Saab (2019, 2020a, 2020b) defend a version of a dual analysis of
paradigmatic slurs. Following Kaplan (1999), they associate slurs with
a dualistic semantics: a truth-conditional meaning and an expressive
 meaning.
[
96
]
What distinguishes their view from others is their account of
expressive meaning. They think of expressive meaning as determined by
a culturally determined stereotype, i.e., a set of schematic,
simple-minded, oversimplified, and mostly false beliefs involving a
prejudicial view of the corresponding group. Thus, the stereotype for
“spic” is a complex concept that encodes a global negative
valence:
illegal, with a spanish accent, poor,
untrustworthy, family-oriented, good dancer, prone to laziness,
etc.
[
97
]
Orlando and Saab model those stereotypes on Wittgenstein’s
(1953) notion of family resemblance. Thus, stereotypes do not offer
necessary and sufficient conditions that determine the corresponding
 extensions.
[
98
]
[
99
]
Several Latin American philosophers have investigated the role of
language in the human mind. Their work has been influenced by
Wittgenstein and, in some cases, by empirical findings from cognitive
science.
At least since Black (1955), analytic philosophers have tried to
explain how metaphors work. Fermandois (2000, 2008, 2009, 2010) argues
that many analytic accounts of metaphor have trouble explaining our
understanding and cognitive uses of “strong metaphors”.
Very roughly, strong metaphors are highly surprising and rich, so they
cannot be easily paraphrased in a finite number of
 sentences.
[
100
]
An example of a strong metaphor is Wittgenstein’s view of
language as a toolbox. While semantic accounts explain metaphor by
positing a change in the meaning of sentences, pragmatic accounts rely
on Gricean intentions (Grice 1989) and speech acts (Searle 1969) to
derive a few, true propositional contents from the literal content
associated with an utterance of a sentence. Insofar as these
approaches depict metaphoric interpretation as an almost automatic
derivation of a few propositional contents, they have a hard time
accommodating the open-ended character of strong metaphors and the
active role of the interpreter in building an adequate interpretation
of those metaphors. They also overlook two important features of
strong metaphors, namely, that they invite the formation of further
metaphoric thoughts and routinely exploit non-propositional elements
like experiences of “seeing-as” and emotions. In a more
positive vein, Fermandois offers a characterization of strong
metaphors as tools that show new ways of seeing things, suggesting
that this role is best served if one reintroduces non-propositional
elements, and supplements those non-propositional elements with a
sui generis
form of non-propositional, context-bound
correctness.
In many everyday conversations, a hearer can automatically, fluently,
and directly determine the intuitive truth-conditions of an utterance
made in their mother tongue. Leclerc (2009, 2012) has made some
contributions to the elucidation of this phenomenon, which he dubs
“spontaneous linguistic understanding” (SLU). To begin
with, he offers a contrastive characterization of SLU. He contends
that SLU is a kind of occurrent understanding that differs from other
phenomena, such as the understanding one can get from a foreign
language one does not fully understand or the “detached”
knowledge one can acquire of the content of an utterance from a
translator. Furthermore, Leclerc argues that two influential programs,
Davidson’s (1984) and Grice’s (1989), are inadequate to
characterize the competences underlying SLU. Finally, building on
ideas from other philosophers, he offers the bare bones of an account
of the competences underlying SLU. Very roughly, SLU is a kind of
occurrent understanding that involves experience, it is not
underwritten by propositional knowledge but by a battery of
dispositions, and it is ultimately grounded in human understanding of
actions and
 situations.
[
101
]
What are the most distinctive features of human languages? Scotto
(2017, 2019a, 2019b, 2020) thinks that human languages are
multimodal
and
semiotically heterogeneous
systems. A
long-standing view thinks of speech as linked to a single modality:
sound production in speakers and audition in hearers. Building on
findings from cognitive science and an original reading of
Wittgenstein’s remarks on meaning experiences, Scotto argues
that the unimodal view overlooks the key role of vision and hands in
the use of facial expressions and gestures in everyday communication,
bodily posture, and speakers’ proprioception of the muscles,
tongue, and lips they use in the production of speech. Her focus on
the multimodal character of human languages casts doubts on some
entrenched views of language. Consider one such view. If one thinks of
language production and interpretation as unimodal, it is tempting to
endorse the view that words are linked to their contents by convention
(as did Hockett 1960, Locke 1690, and de Saussure 1983). But, if
languages exploit many other modalities with higher iconic potential,
it is more plausible to think of large portions of languages as
connecting with their referents and the emotions they express through
various forms of similarity between signs, referents, and the users of
those
 signs.
[
102
]
[
103
]
Since Premack and Woodroff (1978), many philosophers, ethologists,
cognitive scientists, and neuroscientists have investigated the human
abilities involved in the way we understand each other in everyday
life. During the boom of cognitivism, the Theory-Theory and the
Simulation Theory monopolized the discussion (Davies and Stone 1995;
Carruthers and Smith 1996). From a post-cognitivist perspective,
Pérez (2005a, 2005b, 2013) defends a Wittgensteinian approach
to psychological concepts and supplements it with a pre-linguistic
understanding of the mental in second-person interactions. Her
analysis of those interactions gives a pride of place to psychological
states other than belief and insists on the diversity of mental
states. This account has some important consequences. Consider
Jackson’s (1982) case of Mary, the brilliant scientist who
apparently learns something new when she leaves her black-and-white
room and sees a red apple (see the entry
Qualia: The Knowledge Argument
).
 A popular response says that Mary acquires a phenomenal concept she
previously lacked (Alter and Walter 2006). Pérez (2011) offers
an account of the possession conditions of phenomenal concepts that
explains why Mary lacked the relevant phenomenal concept before she
left the room. In joint work with Gomila (Pérez and Gomila
2022), Pérez offers a post-cognitivist, empirically informed
account of the second-person perspective as fundamental to the
development of mental concepts where emotions and direct perception
play a key
 role.
[
104
]
[
105
]
Many analytic philosophers active in Latin America have joined the
debate on the nature of phenomenal consciousness.
When you see a red patch, there is something it is like for you to
undergo that experience (Nagel 1974). Many theories of phenomenal
consciousness have focused on the problem of qualities, which consists
in characterizing the qualitative character that distinguishes an
experience as of a red patch from—let us say—an experience
as of listening to a birdsong. Sebastián (2012, 2020,
forthcoming) has focused on an equally important but less discussed
issue, namely, the fact that experiences have subjective character. He
has put forward two hypotheses. First, if one unpacks the subjectivity
of experience in representational terms, one will be able to use
conceptual tools from teleosemantic theories of content to offer a
naturalistic explanation of subjective character (see the entry
Teleological Theories of Mental Content
).
 Second, if one analyzes the representational content of subjective
character as a perspectival
de se
representation analogous to
that put forward by Lewis (1979), one will be able to offer an
accurate characterization of altered states of consciousness and draw
a boundary between conscious and unconscious processes.
Another topic of interest has been metacognition. Consider the
following example. Just after the host of a TV show asks,
“What’s the capital of Bolivia?”, Anna rushes to
press the button before she has even retrieved the answer. Her action
was motivated by a “feeling of knowing”. This and other
“metacognitive feelings” have been studied in cognitive
science for decades. However, philosophers only started to
systematically examine them in the 2000s (Dokic 2012; Proust 2012).
Arango-Muñoz (2014a) has contributed to this research program
by offering a unified account of metacognitive feelings that
synthetizes earlier work. On his view, metacognitive feelings are
intentional experiences whose object is not transparent to the
subject, they come in non-conceptual and conceptual forms, and they
are underwritten by heuristic mechanisms. His work has opened up new
research avenues. For example, given the opacity of their intentional
object, metacognitive feelings challenge intentionalist views
according to which the phenomenal character of experiences supervenes
on their representational contents (Dretske 2006; Tye 2000).
Metacognitive feelings can also explain how one manages to efficiently
employ external cognitive devices. To illustrate, when one is asked
what the capital of Bolivia is, one must decide whether one retrieves
the information from memory or does a Google search.
Arango-Muñoz (2013) thinks that this decision is modulated by
the presence or absence of the feeling of
 knowing.
[
106
]
[
107
]
In philosophy of action, rationalists hold that agency consists in
acting for reasons, where reasons are understood thinly as an
agent’s preferences at the time of acting (Audi 1979; Davidson
1980; Lewis 1989). Amaya (2013) argues that slips are counterexamples
to this view. To illustrate, imagine that Axel has the intention to
drop his child at the daycare on the way to work. However, without
changing his mind, Axel winds up doing something else: he goes
straight to his office and leaves the child unattended for the entire
workday. A few hours later, his child has died of hyperthermia. On the
assumption that Axel is a good parent who cares for his child, his
action does not reveal his preferences at the time. Amaya thinks that
cases like this one are performance mistakes, i.e., mistakes that
arise in the implementation of an agent’s intention. His
analysis gives rise to important questions of cognitive architecture:
What are the roles of capacities such as working memory, attention,
and vigilance in performance mistakes? Also, questions of
responsibility: Given that we hold Axel responsible for his
negligence, slips put pressure on the so-called “epistemic
condition for moral responsibility”, i.e., the idea that moral
responsibility requires awareness of what one is doing, its
consequences, or its moral significance (Amaya and Doris 2015; Amaya
2022). After all, these forms of awareness are absent in Axel’s
slip and other cases of negligence (but see Rudy-Hiller 2019 for
 criticism).
[
108
]
3.2 Applied Ethics, Bioethics, and Philosophy of Law
Latin American analytic philosophers have made important contributions
to ethics, political philosophy, and philosophy of law (for overviews,
see Rivera López 2010; Navarro 2010; Vásquez 2012; and
the entry
Liberalism in Latin America
).
 This section presents a few contributions that apply analytic tools
to address moral and political issues that are tied to the
sociopolitical circumstances of Latin American countries.
Abortion is not legal in most Latin American countries. Indeed, many
women have died or been imprisoned due to this fact. However, abortion
was legalized in Mexico City in 2007 and decriminalized by the
National Supreme Court of Justice in 2021. Some analytic philosophers
have played a role in this change. Valdés (2002) critically
examines the arguments of the Catholic Church against abortion. In
Valdés (2001), she calls the public’s attention to the
problems that arise from child and adolescent pregnancy and pregnancy
that results from rape. She also offers a critical assessment of the
main arguments for and against the legalization of abortion. She
distinguishes three concepts of a person (a biological concept, a
concept related to a potential person, and a moral concept of a
person), and argues that the concept of a person implicit in pro-life
views—namely, that a person is present at the very moment of
conception—is not the moral concept that matters to this
 debate.
[
109
]
Florencia Luna’s views on vulnerability have been influential in
bioethics. For many years, codes of ethics and research ethics
theories adopted a subpopulation approach. They used
vulnerability
as a label to refer to subjects of
some groups: women, racial minorities, the poor, the very sick, and so
on. This approach was subject to severe criticism, though. Some
objected that it promotes the creation of stereotypes that cannot be
easily removed, and that reliance on labels does not offer sufficient
protection to vulnerable subjects. After all, it only exhorts
researchers and ethics committees to pay special attention to members
of those groups when recruiting them as subjects in their studies.
Luna (2004, 2009, 2019a) develops an account of
vulnerability
that avoids these problems. On her
view,
vulnerability
is a “layered
concept”: one and the same subject can have one or several
layers of vulnerability, those layers are not only determined by the
subject’s membership in a group but also by their own context,
and those layers can be modified and—in some
cases—removed. Hence, being a woman does not entail
per
se
being vulnerable. However, being a woman living in a country
that is intolerant to reproductive rights confers on that woman one
layer of vulnerability. If, on top of that, that woman is poor, she
has an extra layer of vulnerability. And so on. Since the layered
concept does not work as a label that singles out an essential
property of members of some groups, it does not promote the creation
of stereotypes. Given that the layered account does not treat
vulnerability
as a general and fixed category, it
enables researchers to develop fine-grained analyses of specific
layers of vulnerability and—on a case-by-case basis—take
effective action to mitigate them. For example, in a given country,
women may have trouble negotiating the use of condoms with their
partners. In such cases, the use of the female condom is not an
option. Other contraceptive methods that preserve the secrecy that
women may desire would be preferable. However, the use of those
contraceptive methods might not mitigate another layer of
vulnerability, namely, the risk of HIV-AIDS
 infection.
[
110
]
Carlos Nino is the main representative of the Argentinian school of
philosophy of law. His influential work on human rights was a response
to the human rights violations perpetrated by the “military
juntas” that governed the country from 1976 to 1983: thousands
of people were tortured, assassinated, and subject to enforced
disappearance. As an advisor of Raúl Alfonsín—the
Argentinian president from 1983 to 1989—, Nino helped designing
new laws to promote human rights and prevent their violation and
develop a strategy to punish the militaries responsible for human
rights violations during the dictatorship (Malem Seña 1994).
Nino’s philosophical work provided a theoretical framework to
justify these
 programs.
[
111
]
Moreover, Nino himself played a decisive role in their
 implementation.
[
112
]
Nino defended a form of moral constructivism according to which
morality is a social practice that seeks to overcome conflicts and
favor cooperation through consensus. He thought of moral practice as a
discourse where individuals freely accept principles to guide their
actions and attitudes towards the actions of others. Those principles
enjoy an intrinsic validity that could be used to confer final
justification on human rights independently of any legal order. He
proposed a
principle of the inviolability of the person
,
which prohibits the imposition on humans—against their
will—of sacrifices and privations that do not lead to their own
benefit, a
principle of autonomy of the person
, which
emphasizes a person’s capacity to choose freely a model of life
and imposes a limit on any interventions by the State and others, and
a
principle of the dignity of the person
, which says that
humans should be treated in accordance with their own decisions,
intentions, or manifestations of consent. These three principles,
devised in the 1970s and developed in Nino (1984), offered the
theoretical foundation for Alfonsín’s legal reforms to
promote human rights and prevent their
 violation.
[
113
]
As for past violations of human rights by the State, Alfonsín
and his collaborators created a committee to inquire into those crimes
(
Comisión Nacional sobre la Desaparición de
Personas
, CONADEP) and urged the competent bodies to prosecute
and condemn some of the militaries responsible for those crimes (the
“Juicio a las
 Juntas”
).
[
114
]
They faced a problem, though: there were so many people involved in
those human rights violations that trying to prosecute them all
involved a serious risk of destabilizing the fragile democratic
institutions and provoking a military
coup
. Nino’s
(1985, 1991b) views on punishment proved useful. Given a retributivist
conception of punishment, the right thing to do was to punish them
all. However, Nino opposed that view on the ground that the sum of two
ills (the offender’s act and the punishment) could not give rise
to a good. His alternative view was instrumentalist. If punishment was
a means to prevent future human rights violations, one could attain
that goal by punishing a select number of responsible
 agents.
[
115
]
The presence of indigenous peoples in Latin America has given rise to
political, social, and cultural tensions. In the 1990s, the Mexican
philosopher Luis Villoro joined the Zapatist movement against the
exploitation, discrimination, and oppression that indigenous peoples
had suffered for more than 500
 years.
[
116
]
In a 1997 book, he defended a novel conception of the State inspired
by the idea of community, a form of organization that is key to
indigenous peoples. In this form of social organization, power is
constrained by value and the individual is conceived as part of a
collectivity, without any relation of domination or subordination of
one entity to
 another.
[
117
]
In a subsequent 2007 book, Villoro defended a moderate
multiculturalism that sought to reconcile the universality of human
rights with the respect and tolerance of cultural diversity. He also
defended a communitarian democracy and urged national states to
respect the self-determination of indigenous peoples.
More recently, some Latin American analytic philosophers have
contributed to the global discussion about the distribution of
vaccines during the Covid-19 pandemic, have helped develop protocols
for the allocation of scarce therapeutic resources (
triage
),
and have discussed the social organization of science during the
 pandemic.
[
118
]
3.3 Metaphilosophy
When analytic philosophy was introduced in the region, it generated an
intellectual revolution. So, it is no wonder that many Latin American
analytic philosophers devoted their efforts to thinking about
metaphilosophical issues such as the methods and nature of philosophy,
the social role of philosophy, and more. This section presents two
metaphilosophical issues: professionalization and the language of
philosophy.
Several Latin American philosophers thought of analytic philosophy as
a tool to professionalize philosophy
 (
Section 2
).
 Against this view, Rabossi (2008) presents some heterodox hypotheses
about philosophy as a discipline. For example, it is tempting to think
of philosophy as a discipline that has been practiced for centuries.
Rabossi rejects this picture: on the basis of a detailed historical
reconstruction, he argues that philosophy as it is practiced today is
the result of a split between philosophy and other theoretical
disciplines in Germany in the nineteenth century. Thus, far from
having an essence that has been preserved for centuries, philosophy as
we know it today is a historically contingent
 practice.
[
119
]
In recent years, other Latin American philosophers have seen the
professionalization of philosophy with suspicion. Hurtado (2012)
argues that professionalization led analytic philosophers to try to
“adjust a small screw in a piece of machinery”, and
neglect long-standing questions about human existence, the use of
philosophical tools to improve one’s life, and the historical,
cultural, and social context in which one does philosophy in Latin
American countries. García-Carpintero (2012) replies to Hurtado
by offering examples where professionalization in the analytic
tradition has led to philosophical progress about longstanding
problems. Quintanilla (2013) responds that the problems Hurtado
associates with professionalization are not specific to analytic
philosophy. They are not only widespread but also due to the research
policies that dominate global research institutions both in the
humanities and the social and natural sciences.
Last but not least, Latin American analytic philosophers have
discussed the role of language in philosophical practice. Analytic
philosophy has developed for the most part in English-speaking
countries, most analytic works are published in English, and
globalization has compelled Latin American analytic philosophers to
produce philosophy in English. These facts raise the question of
whether Latin American philosophers should abandon their native
language (Spanish or Portuguese) when they do philosophy.
Rodríguez-Pereyra (2013) and Ruffino (2013) think that
pragmatic professional reasons speak in favor of using English as the
new Latin, i.e., a new
lingua franca
for analytic philosophy.
Pérez (2013b) and Hurtado (2013) object that this pragmatic
stance overlooks the political, cultural, linguistic, contextual, and
experiential dimensions of language use. To illustrate, the choice of
a specific language can prompt hasty generalizations from a given
language that do not automatically hold for other
 languages.
[
120
]
A way of avoiding those hasty generalizations is to retain the use of
a plurality of languages in
 philosophy.
[
121
]
Moreover, the pragmatic argument hinges on a controversial view of
the language-thought interface. If natural languages are not only
tools to communicate ready-made ideas, but media within which humans
shape their own ideas, then the choice of a language can ultimately
have an impact on whether some ideas gain currency and others not.
4. Concluding Remarks
Analytic philosophy in Latin America has reached a considerable degree
of originality and impact. The more stable democratic political
regimes of the past forty years have also promoted research, freedom
of expression, and critical thought. Globalization and new
technologies have further contributed to this development.
In the early days, Latin American analytic philosophers were mostly
interested in interacting with their Anglo-Saxon peers. That relation
was usually asymmetric. In the last two decades or so, the situation
has started to change. Many Latin American analytic philosophers have
started to strengthen their links with their Latin American peers and
establish more symmetric relations. The first steps were taken with
the organization of small workshops where Anglo-Saxon and Latin
American philosophers exchanged ideas and discussed each other’s
work as equals. In 2006, the project of creating a regional
association for analytic philosophy emerged in Mexico City, when Maite
Ezcurdia introduced the idea to other Latin American colleagues. As a
result, the
Asociación Latinoamericana de Filosofía
Analítica
(ALFAn) was created in 2007. ALFAn has so far
organized six meetings in different countries. Additionally, it has
ongoing projects to mentor new generations of philosophers and
increase the discussion of analytic works produced within the
region.
Bibliography
Special Issues and Symposia
Análisis Filosófico
(vol. 13, no. 1, 1993).
[A special issue on Raúl Orayen’s work].
Análisis Filosófico
(vol. 26, no. 1-2,
2006). [A special issue on Carlos Alchourrón’s
work].
Análisis Filosófico
(vol. 30, no. 1, 2010).
[A special issue on Rabossi 2008].
Análisis Filosófico
(vol. 33, no. 1-2,
2013). [A special issue on Eugenio Bulygin’s work].
Análisis Filosófico
(vol. 35, no. 1-2,
2015). [A special issue on Carlos Nino’s work].
Crítica
(vol. 27, no. 79, 1995). [A special issue
on Simpson 1964].
Crítica
(vol. 45, no. 133, 2013). [It includes the
symposium “The Languages of Publication of Analytic
Philosophy”].
Manuscrito
(vol. 22, no. 2, 1999). [A special issue on
Oswaldo Chateaubriand’s work].
Manuscrito
(vol. 27, no. 1, 2004). [A special issue on
Chateaubriand 2001].
Manuscrito
(vol. 31, no. 1, 2008). [A special issue on
Chateaubriand 2005].
Manuscrito
(vol. 34, no. 1, 2011). [A special issue on
Newton da Costa’s work].
Manuscrito
(vol. 43, no. 4, 2020). [It includes a
symposium on Gómez-Torrente 2019].
Philosophical Studies
(vol. 179, no. 3, 2022). [It
includes a symposium on Gómez-Torrente 2019].
Revista de Humanidades de Valparaíso
(vol. 8,
2016). [A special issue on Roberto Torretti’s work].
Principia
(vol. 15, no. 1-2, 2011). [A special issue on
Newton da Costa’s work].
Studia Logica
(vol. 97, no. 1, 2011). [A special issue on
Newton da Costa’s work].
Synthese
(vol. 125, no. 2, 2000). [A special issue on
Newton da Costa’s work].
Teorema
(vol. 41, no. 2, 2022). [A special issue on the
second-person perspective of psychological attributions].
Cited works
Abath, André, 2008, “Empirical Beliefs, Perceptual
Experiences and Reasons”,
Manuscrito
, 31(1):
543–571.
Abrantes, Paulo, 1999, “Analogical Reasoning and Modeling in
the Sciences”,
Foundations of Science
, 4(3):
237–270.
Aguilera, Mariela, 2016, “Cartographic Systems and
Non-Linguistic Inference”,
Philosophical Psychology
,
29(3): 349–364.
–––, 2021, “Heterogeneous Inferences with
Maps”,
Synthese
, 199(1-2): 3805–3824.
Alchourrón, Carlos and Eugenio Bulygin, 1971,
Normative
Systems
, New York: Springer.
Alchourrón, Carlos, Peter Gärdenfors, and David
Makinson, 1985, “On the Logic of Theory Change: Partial Meet
Contraction and Revision Functions”,
Journal of Symbolic
Logic
, 50(2): 510–530.
Alegre, Marcelo, Roberto Gargarella, and Carlos Rosenkrantz
(eds.), 2008,
Homenaje a Carlos S. Nino
, Buenos Aires:
Facultad de Derecho (UBA)-La Ley.
Almeida, Guido Antônio, 1981, “Fenomenologia e
Análise Lingüística, in Raul F. Landim Filho and
Guido Antônio Almeida (eds.),
Filosofia da Linguagem et
Lógica
, São Paulo: Edições Loyola,
pp. 7–46.
–––, 1985, “Pragmatic Universals and
Communicative Action”, in Marcelo Dascal (ed.),
Dialogue: An
Interdisciplinary Approach
, Amsterdam/New York: John Benjamins,
pp. 213–232.
Alter, Torin and Sven Walter (eds.), 2006,
Phenomenal Concepts
and Phenomenal Knowledge: New Essays on Consciousness and
Physicalism
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Amaya, Santiago, 2013, “Slips”,
Noûs
47(3): 559–576.
–––, 2022, “Negligence: Its Moral
Significance”, in Manuel Vargas and John Doris (eds.),
The
Oxford Handbook of Moral Psychology
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 661–682.
Amaya, Santiago and John M. Doris, 2015, “No Excuses:
Performance Mistakes in Morality”, in Jens Clausen and Neil Levy
(eds.),
Handbook of Neuroethics
, Dordrecht: Springer, pp.
253–272.
Amoroso Costa, Manuel, 1929,
As Idéias Fundamentais da
Matemática
, Rio de Janeiro: Papelaria e Litho –
Typographia Pimenta de Meilo.
Arango-Muñoz, Santiago, 2013, “Scaffolded Memory and
Metacognitive Feelings”,
Review of Philosophy and
Psychology
, 4(1): 135–152.
–––, 2014, “The Nature of Epistemic
Feelings”,
Philosophical Psychology
, 27(2):
193–211.
Arango-Muñoz, Santiago and Juan Pablo Bermúdez,
2018, in Kourken Michaelian, Dorothea Rebus, and Denis Perrin (eds.),
New Directions in the Philosophy of Memory
, New York:
Routledge, pp. 75–96.
Arló-Costa, Horacio and Eduardo Fermé, 2010,
“Formal Epistemology and Logic”, in Susana Nuccetelli,
Ofelia Schutte, and Otávio Bueno (eds.),
A Companion to
Latin American Philosophy
, Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp.
482–495.
Arruda, Ayda Ignez, 1989, “Aspects of the Historical
Development of Paraconsistent Logic”, in Graham Priest, Richard
Routley, and Jean Norman (eds.),
Paraconsistent Logic: Essays on
the Inconsistent
, Munich: Philosophia Verlag, pp.
99–130.
Audi, Robert, 1979, “Intending”,
The Journal of
Philosophy
, 70(13): 387–403.
Ávila, Ignacio, 2014, “Evans on Bodily Awareness and
Perceptual Self-Location”,
European Journal of
Philosophy
, 22(2): 269–287.
–––, 2015, “Perceiving the Intrinsic
Properties of Objects. On Noë’s Enactive View”,
Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences
, 14(1):
55–71.
Ayer, Alfred J., 1959,
Logical Positivism
, New York: The
Free Press.
Barbosa Filho, Balthazar, 1972,
Sur la notion de signification
dans les Investigations Philosophiques de Wittgenstein
, Louvain:
Cahiers de l’Institut Supérieur de Philosophie.
–––, 1981, “Sobre o positivismo de
Wittgenstein”,
Manuscrito
, 5(1): 17–32.
–––, 1995, “Forme, sens et objet dans le
Tractatus de Wittgenstein”,
Cahiers de l’École
Normale Supérieure de Fontenay-Saint-Cloud
, 2:
74–98.
Barceló, Axel, 2012, “Words and Images in
Argumentation”,
Argumentation
, 26(3):
355–368.
–––, 2022, “How to Visually Represent
Structure”, in Valeria Giardino, Sven Linker, Richard Burns,
Francesco Bellucci, Jean-Michel Boucheix, and Petrucio Viana (eds.),
Diagrammatic Representation and Inference
, Cham: Springer,
pp. 218–225.
Batistella, Ernesto (ed.), 1971,
Selección de Textos de
Gottlob Frege
, Maracaibo: Universidad del Zulia.
Benítez, Laura, 2010, “La filosofía, los
filósofos y el Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóficas
en la UNAM. 70° Aniversario”,
Diánoia
,
55(64): 201–230.
Bermúdez, Juan Pablo, 2021, “The Skill of
Self-Control”,
Synthese
, 199(3-4):
6251–6273.
Beuchot, Mauricio, 1981,
La filosofía del lenguaje en
la Edad Media
, Mexico: UNAM.
Black, Max, 1955, “Metaphor”,
Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society
, 55(1): 273–294.
–––, 1993, “More about Metaphor”, in
Andrew Ortony (ed.),
Metaphor and Thought
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2nd edition, pp. 19–41.
Botero, Juan José, 1987, “Actitudes proposicionales:
formalismo y mentalismo en semántica”,
Ideas y
Valores
, 36(73): 3–23.
–––, 2001, “The Immediately Given as
Ground and Background”, in Jean Petitot, Francisco J. Varela,
Bernard Pachoud, and Jean-Michel Roy (eds.),
Naturalizing
Phenomenology: Issues in Contemporary Phenomenology and Cognitive
Science
, Redwood City: Stanford University Press, pp.
440–463.
–––, 2018, “Fenomenología y ciencia
cognitiva: circulación con precaución”, in Cecilia
Monteagudo and Pablo Quintanilla (eds.),
Los caminos de la
filosofía: diálogo y método
, Lima:
Universidad Católica del Perú, pp. 37–58.
Bunge, Mario, 1959,
Causality: The Place of the Causal
Principle in Modern Science
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
––– (ed.), 1960,
Antología
semántica
, Buenos Aires: Ediciones Nueva
Visión.
Burdman, Federico, 2022, “A Pluralistic Account of Degrees
of Control in Addiction”,
Philosophical Studies
,
179(1): 197–221.
Burge, Tyler, 1973, “Reference and Proper Names”,
The Journal of Philosophy
, 70(14): 425–439.
Cannabrava, Euryalo, 1956a,
Elementos de Metodologia
Filosófica
, São Paulo: Companhia Editoria
Nacional.
–––, 1956b,
Introdução a
Filosofía Científica
, São Paulo: Companhia
Editoria Nacional.
–––, 1957,
Ensaios Filosóficos
,
Rio de Janeiro: Ministério da Educação e Cultura,
Instituto Nacional do Livro.
Cardona, Carlos, 2010, “La constitución de objetos
físicos en el Aufbau: Quine contra Carnap”,
Crítica
, 42(124): 51–76.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1937,
Logical Syntax of Language
, London:
Kegan Paul.
Carnielli, Walter A. and Marcelo Coniglio, 2016,
Paraconsistent Logic: Consistency, Contradiction and
Negation
, Dordrecht: Springer.
Carruthers, Peter and Peter K. Smith (eds.), 1996,
Theories of
Theories of Mind
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carvalho, Eros Moreira de, 2021, “An Ecological Approach to
Disjunctivism”,
Synthese
, 198 (Suppl. 1):
285–306.
Carvalho, Felipe, 2021, “Fearful Object Seeing”,
Review of Philosophy and Psychology
, 13(3):
627–644.
Caso, Antonio, 1941,
Positivismo, neopositivismo y
fenomenología,
Mexico: UNAM.
Chateaubriand, Oswaldo, 2001,
Logical Forms I: Truth and
Description
, Campinas: Coleção CLE.
–––, 2005,
Logical Forms II: Logic, Language
and Knowledge
, Campinas: Coleção CLE.
–––, 2007, “The Truth of Thoughts:
Variations on Fregean Themes”,
Grazer Philosophische
Studien
, 75(1): 199–216.
Chuaqui, Ronaldo, 1965,
A Definition of Probability Based on
Equal Likelihood
, Berkeley: UC Berkeley.
Church, Alonzo, 1956,
Introduction to Mathematical Logic
,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
CONADEP, 1984,
Nunca más
, Buenos Aires:
Eudeba.
Costa, Elsa, 2021, “But I Want the Truth!” The Legacy
of Martial Gueroult in São Paulo Philosophy”,
A
Contra corriente
, 18(3): 70–105.
Cussins, Adrian, 1990, “The Connectionist Construction of
Concepts”, in Margaret A. Boden (ed.),
The Philosophy of
Artificial Intelligence
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
368–440.
–––, 1992, “Content, Embodiment and
Objectivity: The Theory of Cognitive Trails”,
Mind
,
101(404): 651–688.
Cuter, João Vergílio, 2005, “Operations and
Truth-Operations in the Tractatus”,
Philosophical
Investigations
, 28(1): 63–75.
Da Costa, Newton, 1958, “Nota sobre o conceito de
contradição”,
Anuário da Sociedade
Paranaense de Matemática
, 1: 6–8.
–––, 1959, “Obervaçoes sobre o
conceito de existencia em matemática”,
Anuário
da Sociedade Paranaense de Matemática
, 2:
16–19.
–––, 1963a,
Sistemas formais
inconsistentes
, Curitiba: Universidade Federal do
Paraná.
–––, 1963b, “Calculs propositionnels pour
les systèmes formels inconsistants”,
Comptes rendus
de l’Académie des Sciences de Paris
, 257:
3790–3793.
Danón, Laura, 2013, “Conceptos de sustancias y
conceptos de propiedades en animales no humanos”,
Crítica
, 45(133): 27–54.
–––, 2022, “Conceptual Recombination and
Stimulus-Independence in Non-Human Animals”,
Theoria:
Revista de Teoría, Historia y Fundamentos de la Ciencia
,
37(3): 309–330.
Dascal, Marcelo, 1984, “Philosophical Analysis in
Brazil”, in Jorge Gracia, Marcelo Dascal, Eduardo Rabossi, and
Enrique Villanueva (eds.),
Philosophical Analysis in Latin
America
, Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 277–284.
Davidson, Donald, 1980,
Essays on Actions and Events
,
Clarendon Press: Oxford.
–––, 1984,
Inquiries into Truth and
Interpretation
, Clarendon Press: Oxford.
Davies, Martin, 2006, “Reference, Contingency, and the
Two-Dimensional Framework”, in Manuel García-Carpintero
and Josep Macià (eds.),
Two-Dimensional Semantics
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 141–175, pp.
83–131.
Davies, Martin and Tony Stone (eds.), 1995,
Folk Psychology:
The Theory of Mind Debate
, Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
De Sá Pereira, Roberto Horácio, 2019, “A New
Defense of Trope Content View of Experience”,
Philosophical
Studies
, 176(7): 1757–1768.
–––, 2020, “Vehicle-Representationalism
and Hallucination”,
Philosophical Studies
, 177(6):
1727–1749.
De Saussure, Ferdinand, 1983,
Course in General
Linguistics
, Charles Bally and Albert Sechehaye (eds.), Roy
Harris (trans.), La Salle (Ill.): Open Court.
Dieterlen, Paulette, 1984,
Sobre los derechos humanos
,
Mexico: UNAM.
Dokic, Jérôme, 2012, “Seeds of Self-Knowledge:
Noetic Feelings and Metacognition”, in Michael J. Beran,
Johannes Brandl, Joseph Perner, and Joëlle Proust (eds.),
The
Foundations of Metacognition
, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 302–321.
D’Ottaviano, Ítala M., 1990, “On the
Development of Paraconsistent Logic and Da Costa’s Work”,
The Journal of Non-Classical Logic
, 7(1-2): 9–71.
D’Ottaviano, Ítala M. and Evandro Luís Gomes,
2011, “On the Development of Logic in Brazil I: The Early Logic
Studies and the Path to Contemporary Logic”,
Revista
Brasileira de História da Matemática
, 11(22):
3–28.
–––, 2012, “On the Development of Logic in
Brazil II: Initiatives in Brazil Related to Logic and Brazilian
Research Groups Dedicated to Logic”,
Revista Brasileira de
História da Matemática
, 12(24): 1–19.
D’Ottaviano, Ítala M., Walter Carnielli, and Elias
Humberto Alves, 1996, “The Centre for Logic in Campinas and the
Development of Logic in Brazil”,
Logique et Analyse
,
39(153-154): 15–29.
Dretske, Fred, 2006, “Representation, Teleosemantics, and
the Problem of Self-Knowledge”, in Graham Macdonald and David
Papineau (eds.),
Teleosemantics: New Philosophical Essays
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 69–84.
Duica, William, 2014,
Conocer sin representar. El realismo
epistemológico de Donald Davidson
, Bogotá:
Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Dussel, Enrique, Eduardo Mendieta, and Carmen Bohórquez
(eds.) (2009),
El pensamiento filosófico latinoamericano,
del Caribe y “latino” [1300–2000]. Historia,
corrientes, temas y filósofos
, México: Siglo
XXI-Centro de Cooperación Regional para la Educación de
Adultos en América Latina y el Caribe.
Emanuel, Ezekiel J. et al., 2020, “An Ethical Framework for
Global Vaccine Allocation”,
Science
, 369(6509):
1309–1312.
Emanuel, Ezekiel J., et al., 2021, “On the Ethics of Vaccine
Nationalism: The Case for the Fair Priority for Residents
Framework”,
Ethics & International Affairs
, 35(4):
543–562.
Eraña, Ángeles, 2021,
De un mundo que hila
personas (o de la inexistencia de la paradoja
individuo/sociedad)
, Mexico: UNAM.
Eraña, Ángeles, 2022, “Prólogo”,
in Luis Villoro,
Los grandes momentos del indigenismo en
México. Edición conmemorativa por el centenario de Luis
Villoro
, Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Económica, pp.
7–18.
Espejo-Serna, Juan Camilo, 2019, “Against Radical
Enactivism’s Narrowmindedness about Phenomenality”,
Synthese
, 198(Suppl. 1): 213–228.
Evans, Gareth, 1982,
The Varieties of Reference
, John
McDowell (ed.), Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ezcurdia, Maite (ed.), 2007,
Orayen: de la forma lógica
al significado
, Mexico: UNAM.
–––, 2015, “El lenguaje y la mente en
Iberoamérica”, in Osvaldo Guariglia, Reyes Mate, and
León Olivé (eds.),
La Filosofía
Iberoamericana en el Siglo XX. Vol. 33/I: Filosofía
teórica e historia de la filosofía
, Madrid: Trotta,
pp. 267–342.
–––, 2017, “Semantic Complexity”, in
María de Ponte and Kepa Korta (eds.),
Reference and
Representation in Thought and Language
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 73–103.
Ezcurdia, Maite, 2022,
Complejidad y ambigüedad
,
Mexico: UNAM.
Fara, Delia G., 2015, “Names as Predicates”,
Philosophical Review
, 124(1): 59–117.
Faria, Paulo, 2021,
Time, Thought, and Vulnerability: An
Inquiry in Cognitive Dynamics
, Buenos Aires: SADAF.
Faria, Paulo, Fátima Évora, Andrea Loparić,
Luiz Henrique Lopes, Marco Zingano (eds.), 2004,
Lógica e
Ontologia: Ensaios em Homenagem a Balthazar Barbosa Filho
,
São Paulo: Discurso Editorial.
Fermandois, Eduardo, 2000, “Verdad y metáfora: una
aproximación pragmática”,
Crítica
,
32(95): 71–102.
–––, 2008, “Wittgenstein, Geertz y la
comprensión de metáforas”,
Crítica
, 40(118): 29–56.
–––, 2009, “Imagen, aspecto y
emoción: Apuntes para una fenomenología de la
metáfora”,
Ideas y Valores
, 58(140):
5–31.
–––, 2010, “Metáforas en
filosofía”, in Óscar Nudler (ed.),
Enciclopedia Iberoamericana de Filosofía. Vol. 31:
Filosofía de la filosofía
, Madrid: Trotta, pp.
315–347.
Fernández, Miguel Ángel and Margarita Valdés,
2009, “Alejandro Rossi”, in Enrique Dussel, Eduardo
Mendieta, and Carmen Bohórquez (eds.),
El pensamiento
filosófico latinoamericano, del Caribe y “latino”
[1300–2000]. Historia, corrientes, temas y
filósofos
, Mexico: Siglo XXI-Centro de Cooperación
Regional para la Educación de Adultos en América Latina
y el Caribe, 2009, pp. 847–848.
Fernández-Pinto, Manuela, 2018, “Democratizing
Strategies for Industry-Funded Medical Research: A Cautionary
Tale”,
Philosophy of Science
, 85(5):
882–894.
–––, 2019, “Doubly Disadvantaged: On the
Recruitment of Diverse Subjects for Clinical Trials in Latin
America”,
Tapuya: Latin American Science
, Technology
and Society, 2(1): 391–407.
–––, 2022, “The Social Organization of
Science During the COVID-19 Pandemic”,
International Journal
of Risk and Safety in Medicine
, 33(3): 223–228.
Fine, Kit, 2007,
Semantic Relationism
, Malden, MA:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Freund, Max, 1992, “Un sistema lógico de segundo
orden conceptualista con operadores lambda ramificados”,
Crítica
, 24(72): 47–72.
–––, 2001, “A Temporal Logic for
Sortals”,
Studia Logica
, 61(3): 351–380.
–––, 2018, “Predication and Sortal
Concepts”,
Synthese
, 198(Suppl. 12):
3085–3106.
García Bacca, Juan David, 1936,
Introducción a
la lógica moderna
, Barcelona: Labor.
García-Carpintero, Manuel, 2012, “La filosofía
analítica y nuestra contribución a ella. Respuesta a
Guillermo Hurtado”,
Diánoia
, 57(69):
151–158.
García de la Sienra, Adolfo (ed.), 2008,
Reflexiones
sobre la paradoja de Orayen
, Mexico: UNAM.
García Díaz, Adolfo, 1992,
Investigaciones
metafísicas
, Maracaibo: Universidad del Zulia.
García Máynez, Eduardo, 1953,
Los principios de
la ontología formal del derecho y su expresión
simbólica
, Mexico: Imprenta Universitaria.
–––, 1966, “Breve historia del Centro de
Estudios Filosóficos”,
Diánoia
, 12:
240–248.
García-Ramírez, Eduardo, 2011, “A Cognitive
Theory of Empty Names”,
Review of Philosophy and
Psychology
, 2(4): 785–807.
–––, 2019,
Open Compositionality: Toward a
New Methodology of Language
, Lanham, MD:Lexington Books.
García-Ramírez, Eduardo and Marilyn Shatz, 2011,
“On Problems with Descriptivism: Psychological Assumptions and
Empirical Evidence”,
Mind and Language
, 26(1):
53–77.
Garzón Valdés, Ernesto and Fernando Salmerón
(eds.), 1993,
Epistemología y cultura. En torno a la obra
de Luis Villoro
, Mexico: UNAM.
Giannotti, José Arthur, 1966,
Origens da
dialética do trabalho
, São Paulo: DifuSão
Européia do Livro.
–––, 2008,
Heidegger/Wittgenstein –
Confrontos
, São Paulo: Companhia das Letras.
Glock, Hans-Johann, 2008,
What is Analytic Philosophy?
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gödel, Kurt, 1944, “Russell’s Mathematical
Logic”, in Paul Arthur Schilpp (ed.),
The Philosophy of
Bertrand Russell
, Evanston: Northwestern University Press, pp.
125–153.
Gomes, Nelson Gonçalves, 1975,
Zur Erkenntnistheorie
und Ethik von Moritz Schlick: Eine historisch-philosophische
Untersuchung ihrer Entwicklung
, Augsburg: Blasaditsch.
Gómez, Adolfo León, 1991,
El primado de la
razón práctica
, Cali: Universidad del Valle.
–––, 1997a,
Lenguaje, comunicación y
verdad
, Cali: Universidad del Valle.
–––, 1997b,
Argumentos y falacias
,
Cali: Universidad del Valle.
Gómez Lobo, Alfonso (ed.), 1972,
Gottlob Frege.
Lógica y Semántica. Introducción,
Traducción y Selección Bibliográfica
,
Valparaíso: Ediciones Universitarias.
Gómez-Torrente, Mario, 2006, “Rigidity and
Essentiality”,
Mind
, 115(1): 227–259.
–––, 2013, “How Quotations Refer”,
The Journal of Philosophy
, 110(7): 353–390.
–––, 2015, “Quantifiers and Referential
Use”, in Alessandro Torza (ed.),
Quantifiers, Quantifiers,
and Quantifiers: Themes in Logic, Metaphysics, and Language
,
Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 97–124.
–––, 2017, “Semantics vs. Pragmatics in
Impure Quotation”, in Paul Saka and Michael Johnson (eds.),
The Semantics and Pragmatics of Quotation
, Cham: Springer,
pp. 135–167.
–––, 2019,
Roads to Reference. An Essay on
Reference Fixing in Natural Language
, New York: Oxford University
Press.
González, Juliana and León Olivé (eds.),
1994,
Aproximaciones a Alejandro Rossi
, Mexico: UNAM.
Gracia, Jorge E., 1984, “Philosophical Analysis in Other
Latin American Countries”, in Jorge Gracia, Marcelo Dascal,
Eduardo Rabossi, and Enrique Villanueva (eds.),
Philosophical
Analysis in Latin America
, Dordrecht: Reidel, pp.
365–80.
–––, 2010, “Cánones
filosóficos y tradiciones filosóficas: el caso de la
filosofía latinoamericana”,
Análisis
Filosófico
, 30(1): 17–34.
Granger, Gilles-Gaston, 1955,
Lógica e Filosofia das
Ciencias
, São Paulo: Edições
Malhoramentos.
Grice, Herbert Paul, 1989,
Studies in the Way of Words
,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Guerreiro, Mario, 1999,
Ceticismo ou Senso Comum?,
Porto
Alegre: EDI-PUCRS.
Gutiérrez, Carlos B., 1964, “El solipsismo de
Wittgenstein”,
Ideas y Valores
, 6(23-24):
103–120.
Gutiérrez, Claudio, 1974, “Un algoritmo de
inteligencia artificial”,
Revista de Filosofía de la
Universidad de Costa Rica
, 13(34): 5–28.
–––, 1982,
Nueve ensayos
epistemológicos
, San José: Editorial Costa
Rica.
Gutzmann, Daniel, 2015,
Use-Conditional Meaning: Studies in
Multidimensional Semantics
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Guzmán Jorquera, Edgar, 2002,
Existencia y
realidad
, Arequipa: Universidad Nacional de San
Agustín.
Hansberg, Olbeth, 1996,
La diversidad de las emociones
,
Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Hansberg, Olbeth and Guillermo Hurtado (eds.), 2012,
Alejandro
Rossi
, Mexico: Instituto de Investigaciones
Filosóficas-Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Hegenberg, Leônidas, 1978, “A Lógica e a
Filosofia da Ciência no Brasil”, in Adolpho Crippa et al.
(eds.),
As Idéias Filosóficas no Brasil.
Século XX – Parte II
, São Paulo:
Convívio, pp. 143–201.
Hidalgo, Cecilia and Verónica Tozzi (eds.), 2010,
Filosofía para la ciencia y la sociedad: indagaciones en
honor a Félix Gustavo Schuster
, Buenos Aires:
CICCUS-CLACSO.
Hockett, Charles F., 1960, “The Origin of Speech”,
Scientific American
, 203(3): 88–96.
Holguín, Magdalena, 1997,
Wittgenstein y el
escepticismo
, Cali: Universidad del Valle.
Hoyos, Luis Eduardo, 2001,
El escepticismo y la
filosofía trascendental. Estudios sobre el pensamiento
alemán a fines del siglo XVIII
, Bogotá: Siglo del
Hombre Editores-Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Hoyos, Luis Eduardo, 2014,
Ensayos de filosofía
práctica y de la acción
, Bogotá: Universidad
Nacional de Colombia.
Hurtado, Guillermo, 2007,
El búho y la serpiente.
Ensayos sobre la filosofía en México en el siglo
XX
, Mexico: UNAM.
–––, 2012, “¿Qué es y
qué puede ser la filosofía analítica?”
Diánoia
, 57(68): 165–173.
–––, 2013, “Filosofía
analítica en lengua vernácula”,
Crítica
, 45(133): 107–110.
Husserl, Edmund, 2002, “Philosophy as Rigorous
Science”, Marcus Brainard (trans.),
New Yearbook for
Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy
, 2:
249–295.
Jackson, Frank, 1982, “Epiphenomenal Qualia”,
Philosophical Quarterly
, 32(127): 127–36.
Kalpokas, Daniel, 2022, “Perception as a Contentful
Relation”,
European Journal of Philosophy
, 30 (2):
740–754.
Kaplan, David, 1977, “Demonstratives. An Essay on the
Semantics, Logic, Metaphysics and Epistemology of Demonstratives and
Other Indexicals”, in Joseph Almog, John Perry, and Howard
Wettstein (eds.),
Themes from Kaplan
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 481–563.
Krempel, Raquel, 2021, “Is Color Experience Linguistically
Penetrable?”
Synthese
, 199(1-2): 4261–4285.
King, Jeffrey C., 2000,
Complex Demonstratives: A
Quantificational Approach
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Klimovsky, Gregorio, 2008,
Mis diversas existencias
,
Buenos Aires: A-Z Editora.
Klimovsky, Gregorio and Guillermo Boido, 1994,
Las desventuras
del conocimiento científico. Una introducción a la
epistemología
, Buenos Aires: A-Z Editora.
–––, 2005,
Las desventuras del conocimiento
matemático. Filosofía de la matemática: una
introducción
. Buenos Aires: A-Z Editora.
Klimovsky, Gregorio and Cecilia Hidalgo, 1998,
La inexplicable
sociedad. Cuestiones de epistemología en las ciencias
sociales
, Buenos Aires: A-Z Editora.
Klimovsky, Gregorio and Félix Schuster, 2000,
Descubrimiento y creatividad en ciencia
, Buenos Aires:
Eudeba.
Kripke, Saul A., 1980,
Naming and Necessity
, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Lacey, Hugh, 1972,
A linguagem do espaço e do
tempo
, São Paulo: Perspectiva.
Landim Filho, Raul, 1995, “A Refêrencia do
Dêitico Eu na Gênese do Sistema Cartesiano: a Res Cogitans
ou o Homem?”,
Analytica
, 1(2): 41–66.
Leclerc, André, 2009, “Meanings, Actions and
Agreements”,
Manuscrito
, 32(1): 249–288.
–––, “Spontaneous Linguistic
Understanding: A Few Introductory Remarks”,
Disputatio
,
34(4): 713–737.
Lepore, Ernest and Kirk Ludwig, 2000, “The Semantics and
Pragmatics of Complex Demonstratives”,
Mind,
109(434):
199–240.
Levine, Carol et al., 2004, “The Limits of
‘Vulnerability’ as a Protection for Human Research
Participants”,
American Journal of Bioethics
, 4(3):
44–49.
Lewis, David, 1979, “Attitudes De Dicto and De Se”,
Philosophical Review
, 88(4): 513–543.
–––, 1989, “Dispositional Theories of
Value”,
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society,
63:
113–137.
Lo Guercio, Nicolás and Ramiro Caso, 2022, “An
Account of Overt Intentional Dogwhistling”,
Synthese
,
200(3): 1–32.
Loaiza, Juan, forthcoming, “Functionalism and the
Emotions”,
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 1–34. doi:10.1086/715207
Locke, John, 1690,
An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding
, London: Thomas Basset.
López-Silva, Pablo, 2019, “Me and I Are Not Friends,
Just Acquaintances: On Thought Insertion and Self-Awareness”,
Review of Philosophy and Psychology
, 10(2):
319–335.
Lluveres, Pedro, 1976,
Ciencia y escepticismo. Aproximaciones
a Descartes
, Caracas: Equinoccio-Universidad Simón
Bolívar.
Luna, Florencia, 2004, “Vulnerabilidad: la metáfora
de las capas”,
Journal of Bioethics
, 4(3):
44–49.
–––, 2009, “Elucidating the Concept of
Vulnerability: Layers Not Labels”,
IJFAB: International
Journal of Feminist Approaches to Bioethics
, 2(1):
121–139.
–––, 2019a, “Identifying and Evaluating
Layers of Vulnerability – A Way Forward”,
Developing
World Bioethics
, 19(2): 86–95.
–––, 2019b, “¿Por qué la
ética considera importante poder interrumpir ciertos
embarazos?”, in Mario Pecheny and Marisa Herrera (eds.),
Legalización del aborto en la Argentina. Científicas
y científicos aportan al debate
, Buenos Aires: Universidad
Nacional de General Sarmiento, pp. 89–100.
Maffía, Diana, 2003,
Sexualidades migrantes.
Género y transgénero
, Buenos Aires: Feminaria
Editora.
Malem Seña, Jorge F., 1994, “In Memoriam: Carlos
Santiago Nino: Apuntes Bio-Bibliográficos”,
Derechos
y Libertades: Revista del Instituto Bartolomé de las
Casas
, 2(3): 17–75.
Marcondes, Danilo, 1998,
Language and Action: A Reassessment
of Speech Act Theory
, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Margáin, Hugo, 1978,
Racionalidad, lenguaje y
filosofía
, Mexico: UNAM.
Martí, Oscar, 1998, “Analytical Philosophy in Latin
America”, in
Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
Taylor and Francis. Retrieved 5 Mar. 2023, from
https://www.rep.routledge.com/articles/thematic/analytical-philosophy-in-latin-america/v-1.
doi:10.4324/9780415249126-ZA001-1
Mastroleo, Ignacio, et al., 2020, “Allocating Scarce
Unproven Interventions during Public Health Emergencies: Insights from
the WHO MEURI Framework”,
The American Journal of
Bioethics
, 20 (9): 41–44.
Mazza, Débora, 2009, “Intercâmbios
acadêmicos internacionais: bolsas CAPES, CNPQ e FAPESP”,
Cuadernos de Pesquisa
, 39(137): 521–547.
Meléndez, Raúl, 1998,
Verdad sin fundamentos:
una indagación acerca del concepto de verdad a la luz de la
filosofía de Wittgenstein
, Bogotá: Ministerio de
Cultura.
Mena, Ricardo, forthcoming, “Metalinguistic Effects”,
Mind and Language
. doi:10.1111/mila.12390
Mendonça, Wilson, 2002, “Supervenience and the
Problem of Downward Causation”,
Manuscrito
, 25(3):
251–270.
Miró Quesada, Francisco, 1946,
Lógica
,
Lima: Librería e Imprenta Domingo Miranda.
–––, 1982, “La filosofía de la
lógica de N.C.A. da Costa”,
Crítica
,
14(42): 65–85.
Molina, Nicolás, 1954,
Matemática y
filosofía (Reflexiones para la delimitación del
territorio filosófico)
, Mexico: s.n.
Monsalve, Alfonso, 1994,
Teoría de la
argumentación
, Medellín: Universidad de
Antioquia.
Moretti, Alberto, 2008,
Interpretar y referir. Ejercicios de
análisis filosófico
, Buenos Aires: Grama.
–––, 2021,
En Sayos analíticos
,
Buenos Aires: SADAF.
Moretti, Alberto and Guillermo Hurtado (eds.), 2003,
La
paradoja de Orayen
, Buenos Aires: Eudeba.
Moretti, Alberto, Eleonora Orlando, and Nora Stigol (eds.), 2015,
A medio siglo de Formas lógicas, realidad y significado de
T. M. Simpson
, Buenos Aires: Eudeba.
Murillo, Alejandro, 2018, “Is the Body Represented in
Everyday Bodily Activities?”,
Phenomenology and the
Cognitive Sciences
, 17(3): 591–604.
Nagel, Thomas, 1974, “What is It Like to Be a Bat?”,
Philosophical Review
, 83(4): 435–450.
Navarro, Pablo, 2010, “Deontic Logic and Legal
Philosophy”, in Susana Nuccetelli, Ofelia Schutte, and
Otávio Bueno (eds.),
A Companion to Latin American
Philosophy
, Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 439– 453.
Neale, Stephen, 2008, “Term Limits Revisited”,
Philosophical Perspectives
, 22(1): 375–442.
Nino, Carlos Santiago, 1979, “La fundamentación de la
legítima defensa: réplica al profesor Fletcher”,
Doctrina Penal
, 2(6): 235–256.
–––, 1984,
Ética y derechos
humanos
, Buenos Aires: Astrea.
–––, 1985, “The Human Rights Policy of the
Argentine Constitutional Government: A Reply”,
Yale Journal
of International Law
, 11(1): 217–230.
–––, 1989, “La derivación de los
principios de responsabilidad penal de los fundamentos de los derechos
humanos”,
Doctrina Penal
, 12(45): 29–48.
–––, 1991a,
The Ethics of Human Rights
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 1991b, “The Duty to Punish Past
Abuses of Human Rights Put into Context: The Case of Argentina”,
The Yale Law Journal
, 100(8): 2619–2640.
–––, 2013,
Ocho lecciones sobre ética
y derecho para pensar la democracia
, Buenos Aires: Siglo
XXI.
Nuño, Juan, 1965,
Sentido de la filosofía
contemporánea
, Caracas: Universidad Central de
Venezuela.
–––, 1967, “De la distinción entre
lógica formal y lógica dialéctica”,
Crítica
, 1(2): 39–54.
–––, 1969, “El proceso de
formalización semántica en Tarski y Carnap”,
Diánoia
, 15: 87–114.
–––, 1973,
Elementos de lógica
formal
, Caracas: Universidad Central de Venezuela.
–––, 1987, “Esto no tiene nombre”,
Crítica
, 19(55): 3–17.
Olivé, León and Luis Villoro (eds.), 1996,
Filosofía moral, educación e historia: homenaje a
Fernando Salmerón
, Mexico: UNAM.
Onofri, Andrea, 2018, “The Publicity of Thought”,
Philosophical Quarterly
, 68(272): 521–541.
–––, 2022, “Two Pictures of Communication:
From Content to Coordination”,
Synthese
, 200(4):
1–20.
Orayen, Raúl, 1989,
Lógica, significado y
ontología
, Mexico: UNAM.
–––, 1992, “La teoría de modelos
vista por el ojo de Dios”,
Diánoia
, 38:
161–170.
Orlando, Eleonora and Andrés Saab, 2019,
“Términos peyorativos de grupo, estereotipos y actos de
habla”,
Crítica
, 51(153): 31–58.
–––, 2020a, “Slurs, Stereotypes and
Insults”,
Acta Analytica
, 35(4): 599–621.
–––, 2020b, “A Stereotype Semantics for
Syntactically Ambiguous Slurs”,
Analytic Philosophy
,
61(2): 101–129.
––– (eds.), 2020c,
Slurs and Expressivity:
Semantics and Beyond
, Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Ortiz-Millán, Gustavo, 2009,
La moralidad del
aborto
, Mexico: Siglo XXI.
Páez, Andrés, 2014, “La prueba testimonial y
la epistemología del testimonio”,
Isonomía
, 40: 95–118.
–––, 2009, “Artificial Explanations: The
Epistemological Interpretation of Explanation in AI”,
Synthese
, 170(1): 131–146.
–––, 2019, “The Pragmatic Turn in
Explainable Artificial Intelligence (XAI)”,
Minds and
Machines,
29(3): 441–459.
Pereda, Carlos, 1994a,
Vértigos argumentales: una
ética de la disputa
, Barcelona: Anthropos.
–––, 1994b,
Razón e
incertidumbre
, Mexico: Siglo XXI.
–––, 1999,
Crítica de la razón
arrogante
, Mexico: Taurus-Alfaguara.
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 1931–1958,
Collected
Papers
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1974.
Pereira, Francisco, 2019,
Ver o alucinar: una mirada
introductoria a la filosofía de la percepción
,
Mexico: Gedisa.
–––, 2021,
Ver no es creer: sobre el rol de
los conceptos en la experiencia visual
, Mexico: Gedisa.
Pérez, Diana, 2005a, “Is Thought without Language
Possible?”,
Principia
, 9(1-2): 177–191.
–––, 2005b, “Mental Concepts as Natural
Kind Concepts”,
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
,
30(Suppl.): 197–221.
–––, 2011, “Phenomenal Concepts, Color
Experience, and Mary’s Puzzle”,
Teorema
, 30(3):
113–133.
–––, 2013a,
Sentir, desear, creer. Una
aproximación filosófica a los conceptos
psicológicos
, Buenos Aires: Prometeo.
–––, 2013b, “La voluntad de
comunicarse”,
Crítica
, 45(133):
91–97.
Pérez, Diana and Luis Fernández Moreno (eds.), 2008,
Cuestiones filosóficas. Ensayos en honor de Eduardo
Rabossi
, Buenos Aires: Catálogos.
Pérez, Diana and Antoni Gomila, 2022,
Social Cognition
and the Second Person in Human Interaction
, London:
Routledge.
Perini-Santos, Ernesto, 2023, “Articulating a Framework for
Unarticulated Constituents”,
Mind and Language
, 38(1):
98–118.
Piacenza, Eduardo, 2015,
Interpretación jurídica
y argumentación (y otros ensayos filosóficos)
,
Corina Yoris and Arturo Serrano (eds.), Caracas: Universidad
Católica Andrés Bello-Universidad Metropolitana.
Platts, Mark, 1979,
Ways of Meaning
, London: Routledge
and Kegan Paul.
–––, 1985, “The Object of Desire”,
Crítica
, 17(50): 3–28.
–––, 1986, “Desire and Action”,
Noûs
, 20(2): 143–155.
–––, 1994, “Deseos distinguidos”,
Crítica
, 26(76-77): 129–154.
Porchat, Oswaldo, 1969, “O conflito das filosofias”,
Revista Brasileira de Filosofia
, 19(73): 3–15.
–––, 1974, “Contra o historicismo em
teoria da ciência”,
Revista de Historia
, 50(100):
483–514.
–––, 2006,
Rumo ao ceticismo
,
São Paulo: Universidade do Estado de São Paulo.
Potts, Christopher, 2005,
The Logic of Conventional
Implicatures
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Predelli, Stefano, 2013,
Meaning Without Truth
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Premack, David and Guy Woodruff, 1978, “Does the Chimpanzee
Have a Theory of Mind?”
Behavioral and Brain Sciences
,
1(4): 515–629.
Proust, Joëlle, 2012, “Metacognition and Mind Reading:
One or Two Functions?” In Michael J. Beran, Johannes Brandl,
Joseph Perner, and Joëlle Proust (eds.),
The Foundations of
Metacognition
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
234–250.
Quine, Willard van Orman, 1944,
O sentido da Nova
Lógica
, São Paulo: Martins.
Quintanilla, Pablo, 2003, “Homenaje a Edgar Guzmán
Jonquera (1935–2000)”,
Areté
, 15(1):
157–168.
–––, 2013, “Otra vuelta de tuerca: la
filosofía analítica iberoamericana”,
Diánoia
, 58(71): 153–166.
–––, 2019,
La comprensión del otro.
Explicación, interpretación y racionalidad
, Lima:
Editorial PUCP.
Rabossi, Eduardo, 1975,
Análisis filosófico,
lenguaje y metafísica
, Caracas: Monte Ávila
Editores.
–––, 1976,
La justificación moral del
castigo
, Buenos Aires: Astrea.
–––, 1984, “Philosophical Analysis in
Argentina”, in Jorge Gracia, Marcelo Dascal, Eduardo Rabossi,
and Enrique Villanueva (eds.),
Philosophical Analysis in Latin
America
, Dordrecht: Reidel, pp. 17–23.
–––, 2008,
En el comienzo Dios creó
el canon
, Buenos Aires: Gedisa.
Raggio, Andrés, 1962, “Lógica e
intuición”,
Revista de Humanidades
, 5(2):
28–36.
–––, 1968, “Propositional Sequence-Calculi
for Inconsistent Systems”, in Andrés Raggio,
Andrés Raggio. Escritos Completos (1927–1991)
,
Alberto Moreno and Mercedes Doffi (eds.), Buenos Aires: Eudeba, pp.
179–191.
Ramírez, Mario Teodoro (ed.), 2014,
Luis Villoro:
pensamiento y vida
, Mexico: Siglo XXI.
Ramis, Pompeyo, 1978,
Veinte filósofos
venezolanos
, Mérida: Universidad de Los Andes.
Ramos, Jaime, 2001, “Las facetas de lo mental”,
Ideas y Valores
, 50(117): 21–36.
–––, 2021, “Leyendo a Wittgenstein desde
la periferia”,
Ideas y Valores
, 70(Suppl. 7):
173–213.
Rivera López, Eduardo, 2001,
Ética y trasplantes
de órganos
, México: UNAM-Fondo de Cultura
Económica.
–––, 2010, “Contemporary Ethics and
Political Philosophy”, in Susana Nuccetelli, Ofelia Schutte, and
Otávio Bueno (eds.),
A Companion to Latin American
Philosophy
, Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 357–369.
–––, 2017, “Is Medically Assisted Death a
Special Obligation?”,
Journal of Medical Ethics
, 43(6):
401–406.
–––, 2018, “El aborto y el derecho a la
vida desde la concepción”,
Letra: Derecho Penal
,
3(6): 17–26.
Rivera López, Eduardo et al., 2020, “Propuesta para
la elaboración de un protocolo de triaje en el contexto de la
pandemia de COVID-19”,
Revista de Bioética y
Derecho
, 50: 37–61.
Rolla, Giovanni, 2022, “Do Babies Represent? On a Failed
Argument for Representationalism”,
Synthese
, 200(4):
1–20.
Rosas, Alejandro, 1996,
Kants Idealistische Reduktion. Das
Mentale und das Materielle im Transzcendentalen Idealismus
,
Würzburg: Koenigshausen & Neumann.
–––, 2008, “The Return of Reciprocity: A
Psychological Approach to the Evolution of Cooperation”,
Biology and Philosophy
, 23(4): 555–566.
–––, 2010, “Beyond Inclusive Fitness? On A
Simple and General Explanation for the Evolution of Altruism”,
Philosophy and Theory in Biology
, 2(4): 1–9.
Rodríguez, Carolina, 2002, “El desarrollo
histórico del análisis filosófico en
Colombia”,
Estudios Latinoamericanos
, 10-11:
33–49.
Rodríguez-Pereyra, Gonzalo, 2013, “La lengua de
publicación de la filosofía
‘analítica’”,
Crítica
,
45(133): 83 –90.
Rodríguez Tirado, Álvaro, 1986, “Seguir una
regla: tres interpretaciones”,
Crítica
, 18(53):
3–32.
–––, 1987,
La identidad personal y el
pensamiento autoconsciente
, Mexico: UNAM.
Rossi, Alejandro, 1969,
Lenguaje y significado
, Mexico:
Siglo XXI.
–––, 1970, “Una imagen de José
Gaos”,
Revista de la Universidad de México
,
24(9): 14–16.
–––, 1978,
Manual del distraído
,
Mexico: Joaquín Mortiz.
–––, 1996,
Cartas credenciales
, Mexico:
Editorial Vuelta.
Rudy-Hiller, Fernando, 2019, “Give People a Break: Slips and
Moral Responsibility”,
Philosophical Quarterly
,
69(277): 721–740.
Ruffino, Marco, 2013, “Some Remarks about Gonzalo Rodriguez
Pereyra’s Advice on the Language of Philosophy”,
Crítica
, 45(133): 99–105.
–––, 2022,
Contingent A Priori Truths:
Metaphysics, Semantics, Epistemology and Pragmatics
, Cham:
Springer.
Ruffino, Marco, Luca San Mauro, and Giorgio Venturi, 2020,
“Speech Acts in Mathematics”,
Synthese
, 198(10):
10063–10087.
Rumfitt, Ian, 2003, “Savoir faire”,
The Journal of
Philosophy
, 100(3): 158–166.
Saab, Salma, 1978, “La inferencia y la justificación
en el conocimiento perceptual”,
Diánoia
, 24(24):
190–200.
–––, 2007,
Los senderos de la
explicación mental
, Mexico: UNAM.
Salazar Bondy, Augusto, 1971,
Para una filosofía del
valor
, Santiago: Editorial Universitaria.
Salles, João Carlos, 2012,
O cético e o
enxadrista: Significação e experiencia em
Wittgenstein
, Salvador: Quarteto.
Salmerón, Fernando, 1971,
La filosofía y las
actitudes morales
, Mexico: Siglo XXI.
–––, 1978, “El Instituto de
Investigaciones Filosóficas (Informe de Doce
Años)”,
La palabra y el hombre
, 26:
3–19.
–––, 1991a, “Nota sobre la
recepción del análisis filosófico en
América Latina”,
Isegoría. Revista de
Filosofía Moral y Política
, 3: 119–137.
–––, 1991b,
Enseñanza y
filosofía
, Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Sasso, Javier, 1998,
La filosofía latinoamericana y las
construcciones de su historia
, Caracas: Monte Ávila
Editores.
Schajowicz, Ludwig, 1964,
La filosofía y el mundo
contemporáneo
, Río Piedras: Editorial
Universities.
Schuster, Félix, 1982,
Explicación y
Predicción. La validez del conocimiento en ciencias
sociales
, Buenos Aires: CLACSO.
Scotto, Carolina, 2017, “Wittgenstein: iconicidad en el
lenguaje y ‘experiencia del significado’”,
Disputatio: Philosophical Research Bulletin
, 6(7):
423–457.
–––, 2019a, “El lenguaje verbal
también es icónico: correspondencias transmodales y
simbolismo sonoro”, in Carolina Scotto, Fernando G.
Rodríguez, and Irene Audisio (eds.),
Los signos del cuerpo:
enfoques multimodales de la mente y del lenguaje
, Buenos Aires:
Teseo-UAI, pp. 35–78.
–––, 2019b, “Meaning is a Physiognomy:
Wittgenstein on Seeing Words and Faces”,
Nordic Wittgenstein
Review
, 8(1-2): 115–150.
–––, 2020, “El lenguaje humano:
¿una estructura más un código o un sistema
comunicativo dinámico, multimodal y semióticamente
heterogéneo?”,
Análisis. Revista de
Investigación Filosófica
, 7: 3–29.
–––, 2022a, “A Pragmatics-First Approach
to Faces”,
Topoi
41: 641–657.
–––, 2022b “La segunda persona y la
pragmática de la comunicación cara-a-cara”,
Teorema
, 41: 109–131.
Searle, John, 1969,
Speech Acts
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Searle, John and Daniel Venderveken, 1985,
Foundations of
Illocutionary Logic
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sebastián, Miguel Ángel, 2012, “Experiential
Awareness: Do You Prefer ‘It’ to ‘Me’?”,
Philosophical Topics
, 40(2): 155–177.
–––, 2020, “Perspectival
Self-Consciousness and Ego-Dissolution: An Analysis of (Some) Altered
States of Consciousness”,
Philosophy and the Mind
Sciences
, 1(1): 9.
–––, forthcoming, “First-Person
Perspective in Experience: Perspectival De Se Representation as an
Explanation of the Delimitation Problem”,
Erkenntnis
.
doi:10.1007/s10670-022-00564-4
Secco, Gisele Dalva and Miguel Álvarez Lisboa, 2022,
“History of Logic in Latin America: the Case of Ayda Ignez
Arruda”,
British Journal for the History of Philosophy
,
30(2): 384–408.
Sedley, David, 2003,
Plato’s Cratylus
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Sierra, Rubén, 1987,
Apreciación de la
filosofía analítica
, Bogotá: Centro Editorial
Universidad Nacional de Colombia.
Silva, Vicente Ferreira da, 1940,
Elementos de Lógica
Matemática
, São Paulo: Editora Cruzeiro do
Sul.
Silva Filho, Waldomiro and Felipe Rocha, 2016, “Reflection,
Epistemic Value and Human Flourishing”,
Analytica
,
19(1): 129–144.
Simpson, Thomas Moro, 1964,
Formas lógicas, realidad y
significado
, Buenos Aires: Eudeba.
–––, 1973,
Semántica
filosófica: Problemas y discusiones
, Buenos Aires: Siglo
XXI.
Skidelsky, Liza, 2009, “La versión débil de la
hipótesis del pensamiento en lenguaje natural”,
Theoria
, 24(1): 83–104.
–––, 2013, “Faculty of Language,
Functional Models, and Mechanisms”,
Journal of Cognitive
Science
, 14(2): 111–149.
Smith, Plínio Junqueira, 2018, “Porchat,
Neopirronismo e a Filosofía Analítica (Discurso de
Homenagem a Oswaldo Porchat Pereira)”, in: Waldomiro Silva Filho
(ed.),
Novos Ensaios de Filosofia Analítica: Ensaios
Vencedores do Prêmio da Sociedade Brasileira de Filosofia
Analítica
, Pelotas: Série Dissertatio Filosofia,
pp. 12–38.
Stahl, Gerold, 1956,
Introducción a la lógica
simbólica
, Santiago: Universidad de Chile.
–––, 1960,
Enfoque moderno de la
lógica clásica
, Santiago: Universidad de
Chile.
Stalnaker, Robert, 2001, “On Considering a Possible World as
Actual”,
Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volumes
,
75: 141–156.
Stanley, Jason and Timothy Williamson, 2001,
“Knowing-How”,
The Journal of Philosophy
, 98(8):
411–444.
Stepanenko, Pedro (ed.), 2017,
Luis Villoro: Conocimiento y
emancipación. Homenaje póstumo del Instituto de
Investigaciones Filosóficas
, Mexico: UNAM.
Tarski, Alfred, 1941,
Introduction to Logic and the
Methodology of Deductive Sciences
, New York: Dover
Publications.
Teixeira, Célia, 2022, “Epistemic Analyticity
Reconsidered”,
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
, 103(2):
280–292.
Tomasini, Alejandro, 1986,
Los atomismos lógicos de
Russell y Wittgenstein
, Mexico: UNAM.
Torretti, Roberto, 1967,
Manuel Kant. Estudio sobre los
fundamentos de la filosofía crítica
, Buenos Aires:
Charcas.
–––, 1961a, “Reflexiones sugeridas por el
Tractatus de Wittgenstein”,
Revista de Ciencias
Sociales
, 4: 479–490.
–––, 1961b, “Willard van Orman Quine, From
a Logical Point of View, 2nd ed., Cambridge MA 1961”,
Revista de Filosofía
, 9(1-2): 151–154.
–––, 1962, “Alfred J. Ayer, ed., Logical
positivism, Glencoe IL 1959”,
Revista de
Filosofía
, 9(3): 157–164.
–––, 1968, “Las Investigaciones de
Wittgenstein y la posibilidad de la filosofía”,
Diálogos
, 10: 35–59.
–––, 1978,
Philosophy of Geometry from
Riemann to Poincaré
, Dordrecht: Reidel.
–––, 1983,
Relativity and Geometry
,
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Trejo, Wonfilio, 1987,
Fenomenalismo y Realismo
, Mexico:
UNAM.
Tye, Michael, 2000,
Consciousness, Content, and Color
,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Valdés, Margarita, 2001,
Controversias sobre el
aborto
, Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Económica-UNAM.
–––, 2002, “Abortion and Contraception in
Mexico: The Attitudes and the Arguments of the Catholic Church”,
in Arleen L. F. Salles and María Julia Bertomeu (eds.),
Bioethics: Latin American Perspectives
, Amsterdam/New York:
Rodopi, pp. 27–51.
Valdés, Margarita and Miguel Ángel Fernández,
2009, “La filosofía analítica”, in Enrique
Dussel, Eduardo Mendieta, and Carmen Bohórquez (eds.),
El
pensamiento filosófico latinoamericano, del Caribe y
“latino” [1300–2000]. Historia, corrientes, temas y
filósofos
, Mexico: Siglo XXI-Centro de Cooperación
Regional para la Educación de Adultos en América Latina
y el Caribe, 2009, pp. 352–361.
Valdivia, Lourdes, 1985, “Frege: una estipulación
viable”,
Crítica
, 17(49): 3–20.
–––, 1987, “Nombres y predicados: algunas
consideraciones”,
Crítica
, 19(55):
83–95.
Valero, Aurelia (ed.), 2012,
Filosofía y
vocación. Seminario de filosofía moderna de José
Gaos. Textos de José Gaos, Ricardo Guerra, Alejandro Rossi,
Emilio Uranga y Luis Villoro
, Mexico: Fondo de Cultura
Económica.
Vaz Ferreira, Carlos, 1910,
Lógica viva
,
Montevideo: Talleres Gráficos A. Barreiro y Ramos.
–––, 1940,
Transcendentalizaciones
matemáticas ilegítimas y falacias correlacionadas
,
Buenos Aires: Universidad de Buenos Aires.
Vázquez, Rodolfo, 2012, “Filosofía del derecho
en Latinoamérica”,
Doxa. Cuadernos de
Filosofía del Derecho
, 35: 833–856.
Villanueva, Enrique, 1984,
Lenguaje y privacidad
, Mexico:
UNAM.
Villoro, Luis, 1982,
Creer, saber, conocer
, Mexico: Siglo
XXI.
–––, 1997,
El poder y el valor. Fundamentos
de una ética política
, Mexico: Fondo de Cultura
Económica-El Colegio Nacional.
–––, 1998,
Belief, Personal, and
Propositional Knowledge
, Amsterdam: Rodopi.
–––, 2007,
Los retos de la sociedad por
venir. Ensayos sobre justicia, democracia y multiculturalismo
,
Mexico: Fondo de Cultura Económica.
Von Wright, Henrik, 1951,
An Essay in Modal Logic
,
Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 1921,
Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus
, with an Introduction by Bertrand Russell,
New York: Harcourt.
–––, 1953,
Philosophical
Investigations
, G. E. M. Anscombe, Peter Hacker, and Joachim
Schulte (eds.), revised 14th edition, P. M. S. Hacker and Joachim
Schulte (eds.), Oxford: Blackwell, 2009.
–––, 1969,
On Certainty
, G. E. M.
Anscombe and G. H. von Wright (eds.), Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Wrigley, Michael B. and Plínio J. Smith (eds.), 2005,
O
Filósofo e Sua História: uma homenagem a Oswaldo
Porchat
, Campinas: Coleção CLE.
Xavier, Rejane Maria, 1991, “Como caiu o mundo que Carnap
construiu em 1928”,
Reflexão
, 61:
11–29.
Zirión, Antonio, 2021,
El sentido de la
filosofía. Estudios sobre José Gaos
, Mexico:
UNAM.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Works Relevant to this Entry
Beuchot, Mauricio, n. d., “Adolfo
García Díaz”, in
Enciclopedia
Electrónica de la Filosofía Mexicana
. Retrieved 5
Mar. 2023, from
https://divcsh.izt.uam.mx/cefilibe/wp-content/uploads/2013/12/Garcia_Diaz_Adolfo.pdf
Brito, Adriano Naves, 2008, “Sociedade Brasileira de
Filosofia Analítica – SBFA: uma obra em curso”.
Retrieved 5 Mar. 2023, from
https://sites.google.com/view/sbfa-sbpha/mais
Enciclopedia Electrónica de Filosofía
Mexicana
, Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana-Iztapalapa,
Retrieved 5 Mar. 2023, from
https://divcsh.izt.uam.mx/cefilibe/index.php/eefm/
Kaplan, David, 1999,
The Meaning of ‘Ouch’ and
‘Oops’: Explorations in the Theory of Meaning as Use
,
Ms., Los Angeles: UCLA.
Moraes, Carlos Roberto de, 2007,
Uma História da
Lógica no Brasil
, PhD thesis, Rio Claro.
Sasso, Javier, 1994, “Carta a Mario H. Otero”, July
27th, 1994. Retrieved 6 Mar. 2023, from
http://galileo.fcien.edu.uy/sasso.pdf
Associations for Analytic Philosophy in Latin America
Asociación Latinoamericana de Filosofía Analítica
(ALFA).
Asociación de Filosofía e Historia de la Ciencia del Cono Sur
(AFHIC).
Sociedad Argentina de Análisis Filosófico
(SADAF).
Sociedade Brasileira de Filosofia Analítica
(SBFA).
Other Latin American Institutions connected to Analytic Philosophy
Asociación Chilena de Filosofía
(ACHF).
Asociación Filosófica de la República Argentina
(AFRA).
Associação Nacional de Pós-Graduação em Filosofia
(ANPOF).
Centro de Investigaciones Filosóficas
(CIF).
Centro de Lógica, Epistemologia e História da Ciência
(CLE-Unicamp).
Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóficas
(IIFs-UNAM).
Instituto de Investigaciones Filosóficas
(IIF-SADAF-CONICET).
Sociedad Colombiana de Filosofía
(SCF).
Asociación Filosófica de México
(AFM).
Sociedad Filosófica del Uruguay
(SFU).
Sociedad Venezolana de Filosofía
(SVF).
Research Groups in Analytic Philosophy (in alphabetical order)
Análisis: Mente, lenguaje y cognición
(Colombia).
A List of Groups for Analytic Philosophy in Brazil
(SBFA).
Buenos Aires Linguistics and Philosophy of Language Group
(BA-LingPhil) (Argentina).
Buenos Aires Logic Group (BA-logic)
(Argentina).
Centro de Estudios de Filosofía Analítica
(CESFIA) (Peru).
Círculo Wittgensteiniano
(Venezuela).
Conocimiento, filosofía, ciencia, historia y sociedad
(Colombia).
Grupo Círculo de Investigación en Filosofía Analítica
(CIFA) (Peru).
Grupo Conceptos y Percepción
(CyP) (Argentina).
Grupo de Análisis Filosófico de la Biología
(ANFIBIO) (Argentina).
Grupo de Estudios Sociales de la Ciencia y la Tecnología
(GESCyT) (Uruguay).
Grupo de Investigación en Filosofía de las Ciencias Cognitivas
(GIFICC) (Argentina).
Grupo de Investigación en Lógica, Epistemología y Filosofía de la Ciencia
(PHILOGICA) (Colombia).
Grupo de Investigación en Inteligencia Artificial, Filosofía y Tecnología
(GIFT) (Argentina).
Grupo Interdisciplinario de Investigación Mente y Lenguaje
(Peru).
Núcleo de Epistemologia e Lógica
(NEL) (Brazil).
Theorema: Sociedad Peruana de Investigación Filosófica
(Peru).
Journals Devoted to or Open to Analytic Philosophy in Latin America
Abstracta
Análisis Filosófico
Analítica
Analytica
Areté
Cognitio: Revista de Filosofía
Crítica: Revista Hispanoamericana de Filosofía
Diánoia
Estudios de Filosofía
Filosofia Unisinos
Ideas y Valores
Isonomía. Revista de teoría y filosofía del derecho
Kriterion
Manuscrito
O Que Nos Faz Pensar
Páginas de Filosofía
Praxis Filosófica
Principia
Revista Mexicana de Lógica
Scientiae Studia
Tópicos
(Argentina)
Tópicos
(Mexico)
Trans/Form/Ação
Veritas
Related Entries
Chile: philosophy in
|
epistemology, formal
|
epistemology: in Latin America
|
feminist philosophy, approaches: Latin American feminism
|
hate speech
|
Latin American Philosophy
|
Latin American Philosophy: metaphilosophical foundations
|
liberalism: in Latin America
|
liberation, philosophy of
|
logic: of belief revision
|
logic: paraconsistent
|
Mexico: philosophy in
|
philosophy of science: in Latin America
|
skepticism: in Latin America
Acknowledgments
This entry has benefited greatly from the feedback and information we
received from many colleagues and friends. They include Amalia Amaya,
Santiago Amaya, Santiago Arango, Ignacio Ávila, Tomás
Barrero, Hannah Birkenkötter, Juan José Botero, Fernando
Broncano, Marcel Chávez, Ángeles Eraña, Luis
Estrada, Maite Ezcurdia, Paulo Faria, Miguel Ángel
Fernández, Olbeth Hansberg, Luis Eduardo Hoyos, Guillermo
Hurtado, Pablo Melogno, Carlos Montemayor, Alberto Moretti, Eleonora
Orlando, Andrés Páez, Francisco Pereira, Jaime Ramos,
Eduardo Rivera López, Marco Ruffino, Néstor
Rodríguez, Alejandro Rosas, Miguel Ángel
Sebastián, Ricardo da Silva, Pedro Stepanenko, and Aurelia
Valero.