Aristotle’s Political Theory
First published Wed Jul 1, 1998; substantive revision Fri Jul 1, 2022
Aristotle (b. 384–d. 322 BCE), was a Greek philosopher,
logician, and scientist. Along with his teacher Plato, Aristotle is
generally regarded as one of the most influential ancient thinkers in
a number of philosophical fields, including political theory.
Aristotle was born in Stagira in northern Greece, and his father was a
court physician to the king of Macedon. As a young man he studied in
Plato’s Academy in Athens. After Plato’s death he left Athens to
conduct philosophical and biological research in Asia Minor and
Lesbos, and he was then invited by King Philip II of Macedon to tutor
his young son, Alexander the Great. Soon after Alexander succeeded his
father, consolidated the conquest of the Greek city-states, and
launched the invasion of the Persian Empire. Aristotle returned as a
resident alien to Athens, and was a close friend of Antipater, the
Macedonian viceroy. At this time (335–323 BCE) he wrote, or at
least worked on, some of his major treatises, including the
Politics
. When Alexander died suddenly, Aristotle had to flee
from Athens because of his Macedonian connections, and he died soon
after. Aristotle’s life seems to have influenced his political thought
in various ways: his interest in biology seems to be reflected in
the naturalism of his politics; his interest in comparative politics
and his qualified sympathies for democracy as well as monarchy may
have been encouraged by his travels and experience of diverse
political systems; he reacts critically to his teacher Plato, while
borrowing extensively, from Plato’s
Republic
,
Statesman
, and
Laws
; and his own
Politics
is intended to guide rulers and statesmen, reflecting the high
political circles in which he moved.
1. Political Science in General
Supplement: Characteristics and Problems of Aristotle’s Politics
2. Aristotle’s View of Politics
Supplement: Presuppositions of Aristotle’s Politics
3. General Theory of Constitutions and Citizenship
Supplement: Political Naturalism
4. Study of Specific Constitutions
5. Aristotle and Modern Politics
Glossary of Aristotelian Terms
Bibliography
A. Greek Text of Aristotle’s
Politics
B. English Translations of Aristotle’s
Politics
C. Anthologies
D. Single-authored Commentaries and Overviews
E. Studies of Particular Topics
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Political Science in General
The modern word ‘political’ derives from the Greek
politikos
, ‘of, or pertaining to, the polis’.
(The Greek term
polis
will be translated here as
‘city-state’. It is also commonly translated as
‘city’ or  simply anglicized as ‘polis’.
City-states like Athens and Sparta were relatively small and cohesive
units, in which political, religious, and cultural concerns were
intertwined. The extent of their similarity to modern nation-states is
controversial.) Aristotle’s word for ‘politics’ is
politikê
, which is short for
politikê
epistêmê
or ‘political science’. It
belongs to one of the three main branches of science, which Aristotle
distinguishes by their ends or objects. Contemplative science
(including physics and metaphysics) is concerned with truth or
knowledge for its own sake; practical science with good action; and
productive science with making useful or beautiful objects
(
Top
. VI.6.145a14–16,
Met
. VI.1.1025b24,
XI.7.1064a16–19,
EN
VI.2.1139a26–8). Politics is
a practical science, since it is concerned with the noble action or
happiness of the citizens (although it resembles a productive science
in that it seeks to create, preserve, and reform political systems).
Aristotle thus understands politics as a normative or prescriptive
discipline rather than as a purely empirical or descriptive
inquiry.
In the
Nicomachean Ethics
Aristotle describes his subject
matter as ‘political science’, which he characterizes as
the most authoritative science. It prescribes which sciences are to be
studied in the city-state, and the others — such as military
science, household management, and rhetoric — fall under its
authority. Since it governs the other practical sciences, their ends
serve as means to its end, which is nothing less than the human good.
“Even if the end is the same for an individual and for a
city-state, that of the city-state seems at any rate greater and more
complete to attain and preserve. For although it is worthy to attain
it for only an individual, it is nobler and more divine to do so for a
nation or city-state” (
EN
I.2.1094b7–10). The two
ethical works (the
Nicomachean
Ethics and the
Eudemian
Ethics
) explain the principles that form the foundations for
the
Politics
: that happiness is the highest human good, that
happiness is the activity of moral virtue defined in terms of the
mean, and that justice or the common advantage is the political good.
Aristotle’s political science thus encompasses the two fields which
modern philosophers distinguish as ethics and political philosophy.
(See the entry on
Aristotle’s ethics
.)
 Political philosophy in the narrow sense is roughly speaking the
subject of his treatise called the
Politics
. For a further
discussion of this topic, see the following supplementary
document:
Supplement: Characteristics and Problems of Aristotle’s Politics
2. Aristotle’s View of Politics
Political science studies the tasks of the politician or statesman
(
politikos
), in much the way that medical science concerns
the work of the physician (see
Politics
IV.1). It is, in
fact, the body of knowledge that such practitioners, if truly expert,
will also wield in pursuing their tasks. The most important task for
the politician is, in the role of lawgiver
(
nomothetês
), to frame the appropriate constitution for
the city-state. This involves enduring laws, customs, and institutions
(including a system of moral education) for the citizens. Once the
constitution is in place, the politician needs to take the appropriate
measures to maintain it, to introduce reforms when he finds them
necessary, and to prevent developments which might subvert the
political system. This is the province of legislative science, which
Aristotle regards as more important than politics as exercised in
everyday political activity such as the passing of decrees (see
EN
VI.8).
Aristotle frequently compares the politician to a craftsman. The
analogy is imprecise because politics, in the strict sense of
legislative science, is a form of practical knowledge, while a craft
like architecture or medicine is a form of productive knowledge.
However, the comparison is valid to the extent that the politician
produces, operates, maintains a legal system according to universal
principles (
EN
VI.8 and X.9). In order to appreciate this
analogy it is helpful to observe that Aristotle explains the
production of an artifact such as a drinking cup in terms of four
causes: the material, formal, efficient, and final causes
(
Phys
. II.3 and
Met
. A.2). For example, clay
(material cause) is molded into a roughly cylindrical shape
closed at one end (formal cause) by a potter (efficient or moving
cause) so that it can contain a beverage (final cause). (For
discussion of the four causes see the entry on
Aristotle’s physics
.)
One can also explain the existence of the city-state in terms of the
four causes. It is a kind of community (
koinônia
), that
is, a collection of parts having some functions and interests in
common (
Pol
. II.1.1261a18, III.1.1275b20). Hence, it is made
up of parts, which Aristotle describes in various ways in different
contexts: as households, or economic classes (e.g., the rich and the
poor), or demes (i.e., local political units). But, ultimately, the
city-state is composed of individual citizens (see
III.1.1274a38–41), who, along with natural resources, are the
“material” or “equipment” out of which the
city-state is fashioned (see VII.14.1325b38–41).
The formal cause of the city-state is its constitution
(
politeia
). Aristotle defines the constitution as “a
certain ordering of the inhabitants of the city-state”
(III.1.1274b32–41). He also speaks of the constitution of a community
as “the form of the compound” and argues that whether the
community is the same over time depends on whether it has the same
constitution (III.3.1276b1–11). The constitution is not a
written document, but an immanent organizing principle, analogous to
the soul of an organism. Hence, the constitution is also “the
way of life” of the citizens (IV.11.1295a40–b1, VII.8.1328b1–2).
Here the citizens are that minority of the resident population who
possess full political rights (III.1.1275b17–20).
The existence of the city-state also requires an efficient cause,
namely, its ruler. On Aristotle’s view, a community of any sort can
possess order only if it has a ruling element or authority. This
ruling principle is defined by the constitution, which sets criteria
for political offices, particularly the sovereign office
(III.6.1278b8–10; cf. IV.1.1289a15–18). However, on a
deeper level, there must be an efficient cause to explain why a
city-state acquires its constitution in the first place. Aristotle
states that “the person who first established [the city-state]
is the cause of very great benefits” (I.2.1253a30–1). This
person was evidently the lawgiver (
nomothetês
), someone
like Solon of Athens or Lycurgus of Sparta, who founded the
constitution. Aristotle compares the lawgiver, or the politician more
generally, to a craftsman (
dêmiourgos
) like a weaver or
shipbuilder, who fashions material into a finished product
(II.12.1273b32–3, VII.4.1325b40–1365a5).
The notion of final cause dominates Aristotle’s
Politics
from
the opening lines:
Since we see that every city-state is a sort of community and that
every community is established for the sake of some good (for everyone
does everything for the sake of what they believe to be good), it is
clear that every community aims at some good, and the community which
has the most authority of all and includes all the others aims
highest, that is, at the good with the most authority. This is what is
called the city-state or political community. [I.1.1252a1–7]
Soon after, he states that the city-state comes into being for the
sake of life but exists for the sake of the good life
(2.1252b29–30). The theme that the good life or happiness is the
proper end of the city-state recurs throughout the
Politics
(III.6.1278b17–24, 9.1280b39; VII.2.1325a7–10).
To sum up, the city-state is a hylomorphic (i.e., matter-form)
compound of a particular population (i.e., citizen-body) in a given
territory (material cause) and a constitution (formal cause). The
constitution itself is fashioned by the lawgiver and is governed by
politicians, who are like craftsmen (efficient cause), and the
constitution defines the aim of the city-state (final cause,
IV.1.1289a17–18). Aristotle’s hylomorphic analysis has important
practical implications for him: just as a craftsman should not try to
impose a form on materials for which it is unsuited (e.g. to build a
house out of sand), the legislator should not lay down or change laws
which are contrary to the nature of the citizens. Aristotle
accordingly rejects utopian schemes such as the proposal in Plato’s
Republic
that children and property should belong to all the
citizens in common. For this runs afoul of the fact that “people give
most attention to their own property, less to what is communal, or
only as much as falls to them to give attention” (
Pol.
II.3.1261b33–5). Aristotle is also wary of casual political
innovation, because it can have the deleterious side-effect of
undermining the citizens’ habit of obeying the law
(II.8.1269a13–24). For a further discussion of the theoretical
foundations of Aristotle’s politics, see the following supplementary
document:
Supplement: Presuppositions of Aristotle’s Politics
It is in these terms, then, that Aristotle understands the fundamental
normative problem of politics: What constitutional form should the
lawgiver establish and preserve in what material for the sake of what
end?
3. General Theory of Constitutions and Citizenship
Aristotle states, “The politician and lawgiver is wholly
occupied with the city-state, and the constitution is a certain way of
organizing those who inhabit the city-state” (III.1.1274b36–8).
His general theory of constitutions is set forth in
Politics
III. He begins with a definition of the citizen
(
politês
), since the city-state is by nature a
collective entity, a multitude of citizens. Citizens are distinguished
from other inhabitants, such as resident aliens and slaves; and even
children and seniors are not unqualified citizens (nor are most
ordinary workers). After further analysis he defines the citizen as a
person who has the right (
exousia
) to participate in
deliberative or judicial office (1275b18–21). In Athens, for
example, citizens had the right to attend the assembly, the council,
and other bodies, or to sit on juries. The Athenian system differed
from a modern representative democracy in that the citizens were more
directly involved in governing. Although full citizenship tended to be
restricted in the Greek city-states (with women, slaves, foreigners,
and some others excluded), the citizens were more deeply enfranchised
than in modern representative democracies because they were more
directly involved in governing. This is reflected in Aristotle’s
definition of the citizen (without qualification). Further, he defines
the city-state (in the unqualified sense) as a multitude of such
citizens which is adequate for a self-sufficient life
(1275b20–21).
Aristotle defines the constitution (
politeia
) as a way of
organizing the offices of the city-state, particularly the sovereign
office (III.6.1278b8–10; cf. IV.1.1289a15–18). The
constitution thus defines the governing body, which takes different
forms: for example, in a democracy it is the people, and in an
oligarchy it is a select few (the wealthy or well born). Before
attempting to distinguish and evaluate various constitutions Aristotle
considers two questions. First, why does a city-state come into being?
He recalls the thesis, defended in
Politics
I.2, that human
beings are by nature political animals, who naturally want to live
together. For a further discussion of this topic, see the following
supplementary document:
Supplement: Political Naturalism
Aristotle then adds, “The common advantage also brings them
together insofar as they each attain the noble life. This is above all
the end for all both in common and separately”
(III.6.1278b19–24). Second, what are the different forms of rule
by which one individual or group can rule over another? Aristotle
distinguishes several types of rule, based on the nature of the soul
of the ruler and of the subject. He first considers despotic rule,
which is exemplified in the master-slave relationship. Aristotle
thinks that this form of rule is justified in the case of natural
slaves who (he asserts without evidence) lack a deliberative faculty
and thus need a natural master to direct them (I.13.1260a12; slavery
is defended at length in
Politics
I.4–8). Although a
natural slave allegedly benefits from having a master, despotic rule
is still primarily for the sake of the master and only incidentally
for the slave (III.6.1278b32–7). (Aristotle provides no argument
for this: if some persons are congenitally incapable of governing
themselves, why should they not be ruled primarily for their own
sakes?) He next considers paternal and marital rule, which he also
views as defensible: “the male is by nature more capable of
leadership than the female, unless he is constituted in some way
contrary to nature, and the elder and perfect [is by nature more
capable of leadership] than the younger and imperfect”
(I.12.1259a39–b4).
Aristotle is persuasive when he argues that children need adult
supervision because their rationality is “imperfect”
(
ateles
) or immature. But he is unconvincing to modern
readers when he alleges (without substantiation) that, although women
have a deliberative faculty, it is “without authority”
(
akuron
), so that females require male supervision
(I.13.1260a13–14). (Aristotle’s arguments about slaves and women
appear so weak that some commentators take them to be ironic. However,
what is obvious to a modern reader need not have been so to an ancient
Greek, so that it is not necessary to suppose Aristotle’s
discussion is disingenuous.) It is noteworthy, however, that paternal
and marital rule are properly practiced for the sake of the ruled (for
the sake of the child and of the wife respectively), just as arts like
medicine or gymnastics are practiced for the sake of the patient
(III.6.1278b37–1279a1). In this respect they resemble political
rule, which is the form of rule appropriate when the ruler and the
subject have equal and similar rational capacities. This is
exemplified by naturally equal citizens who take turns at ruling for
one another’s advantage (1279a8–13). This sets the stage for the
fundamental claim of Aristotle’s constitutional theory:
“constitutions which aim at the common advantage are correct and
just without qualification, whereas those which aim only at the
advantage of the rulers are deviant and unjust, because they involve
despotic rule which is inappropriate for a community of free
persons” (1279a17–21).
The distinction between correct and deviant constitutions is combined
with the observation that the government may consist of one person, a
few, or a multitude. Hence, there are six possible constitutional
forms (
Politics
III.7):
Correct
Deviant
One Ruler
Kingship
Tyranny
Few Rulers
Aristocracy
Oligarchy
Many Rulers
Polity
Democracy
This six-fold classification (which is doubtless adapted from Plato’s
Statesman
302c–d) sets the stage for Aristotle’s inquiry into
the best constitution, although it is modified in various ways
throughout the
Politics
. For example, he observes that the
dominant class in oligarchy (literally rule of the
oligoi
,
i.e., few) is typically the wealthy, whereas in democracy (literally
rule of the
dêmos
, i.e., people) it is the poor, so
that these economic classes should be included in the definition of
these forms (see
Politics
III.8, IV.4, and VI.2 for
alternative accounts). Also, polity is later characterized as a kind
of “mixed” constitution typified by rule of the
“middle” group of citizens, a moderately wealthy class
between the rich and poor (
Politics
IV.11).
Aristotle’s constitutional theory is based on his theory of justice,
which is expounded in
Nicomachean Ethics
book V. Aristotle
distinguishes two different but related senses of
“justice” — universal and particular — both of
which play an important role in his constitutional theory. Firstly, in
the universal sense “justice” means
“lawfulness” and is concerned with the common advantage and
happiness of the political community (
NE
V.1.1129b11–19, cf.
Pol.
III.12.1282b16–17). The
conception of universal justice undergirds the distinction between
correct (just) and deviant (unjust) constitutions. But what exactly
the “common advantage” (
koinê sumpheron
)
entails is a matter of scholarly controversy. Some passages imply that
justice involves the advantage of all the citizens; for example, every
citizen of the best constitution has a just claim to private property
and to an education (
Pol.
VII.9.1329a23–4,
13.1332a32–8). But Aristotle also allows that it might be
“in a way” just to ostracize powerful citizens even when
they have not been convicted of any crimes (III.13.1284b15–20).
Whether Aristotle understands the common advantage as safeguarding the
interests of each and every citizen has a bearing on whether and to
what extent he anticipates what moderns would understand as a theory
of individual rights. (See Fred Miller and Richard Kraut for differing
interpretations.)
Secondly, in the particular sense “justice” means
“equality” or “fairness”, and this includes
distributive justice, according to which different individuals have
just claims to shares of some common asset such as property. Aristotle
analyzes arguments for and against the different constitutions as
different applications of the principle of distributive justice
(III.9.1280a7–22). Everyone agrees, he says, that justice
involves treating equal persons equally, and treating unequal persons
unequally, but they do not agree on the standard by which individuals
are deemed to be equally (or unequally) meritorious or deserving. He
assumes his own analysis of distributive justice set forth in
Nicomachean Ethics
V.3: Justice requires that benefits be
distributed to individuals in proportion to their merit or desert. The
oligarchs mistakenly think that those who are superior in wealth
should also have superior political rights, whereas the democrats hold
that those who are equal in free birth should also have equal
political rights. Both of these conceptions of political justice are
mistaken in Aristotle’s view, because they assume a false conception
of the ultimate end of the city-state. The city-state is neither a
business enterprise to maximize wealth (as the oligarchs suppose) nor
an association to promote liberty and equality (as the democrats
maintain). Instead, Aristotle argues, “the good life is the end
of the city-state,” that is, a life consisting of noble actions
(1280b39–1281a4). Hence, the correct conception of justice is
aristocratic, assigning political rights to those who make a full
contribution to the political community, that is, to those with virtue
as well as property and freedom (1281a4–8). This is what
Aristotle understands by an “aristocratic” constitution:
literally, the rule of the
aristoi
, i.e., best persons.
Aristotle explores the implications of this argument in the remainder
of
Politics
III, considering the rival claims of the rule of
law and the rule of a supremely virtuous individual. Here absolute
kingship is a limiting case of aristocracy. Again, in books VII-VIII,
Aristotle describes the ideal constitution in which the citizens are
fully virtuous.
Although justice is in Aristotle’s view  the foremost
political virtue (
Pol
. III.9.1283a38–40), the other great
social virtue, friendship, should not be overlooked, because the two
virtues work hand in hand to secure every sort of association
(
EN
VIII.9.1159b26–7). Justice enables the citizens of a
city-state to share peacefully in the benefits and burdens of
cooperation, while friendship holds them together and prevents them
from breaking up into warring factions (cf.
Pol
.
II.4.1262b7–9). Friends are expected to treat each other justly, but
friendship goes beyond justice because it is a complex mutual bond in
which individuals choose the good for others and trust that others are
choosing the good for them (cf.
EE
VII.2.1236a14–15, b2–3;
EN
VIII.2.1155b34–3.1156a10). Because choosing the good for
one another is essential to friendship and there are three different
ways in which something can be called ‘good’ for a human
being—virtuous (i.e., good without qualification), useful, or
pleasant—there are three types of friendship: hedonistic,
utilitarian, and virtuous. Political (or civic) friendship is a
species of utilitarian friendship, and it is the most important form
of utilitarian friendship because the polis is the greatest community.
Opposed to political friendship is enmity, which leads to faction or
civil war (
stasis
) or even to political revolution and the
breakup of the polis, as discussed in Book V of the
Politics.
Aristotle offers general accounts of political or civic friendship as
part of his general theory of friendship in
EE
VII.10 and
EN
VIII.9–12.
4. Study of Specific Constitutions
The purpose of political science is to guide “the good lawgiver
and the true politician” (IV.1.1288b27). Like any complete
science or craft, it must study a range of issues concerning its
subject matter. For example, gymnastics (physical education) studies
what sort of training is best or adapted to the body that is naturally
the best, what sort of training is best for most bodies, and what
capacity is appropriate for someone who does not want the condition or
knowledge appropriate for athletic contests. Political science studies
a comparable range of constitutions (1288b21–35): first, the
constitution which is best without qualification, i.e., “most
according to our prayers with no external impediment”; second,
the constitution that is best under the circumstances “for it is
probably impossible for many persons to attain the best
constitution”; third, the constitution which serves the aim a
given population happens to have, i.e., the one that is best
“based on a hypothesis”: “for [the political
scientist] ought to be able to study a given constitution, both how it
might originally come to be, and, when it has come to be, in what
manner it might be preserved for the longest time; I mean, for
example, if a particular city happens neither to be governed by the
best constitution, nor to be equipped even with necessary things, nor
to be the [best] possible under existing circumstances, but to be a
baser sort.” Hence, Aristotelian political science is not
confined to the ideal system, but also investigates the second-best
constitution or even inferior political systems, because this may be
the closest approximation to full political justice which the lawgiver
can attain under the circumstances.
Regarding the constitution that is ideal or “according to
prayer,” Aristotle criticizes the views of his predecessors in
the
Politics
and then offers a rather sketchy blueprint
of his own in
Politics
VII–VIII. Although his own
political views were influenced by his teacher Plato, Aristotle is
highly critical of the ideal constitution set forth in Plato’s
Republic
on the grounds that it overvalues political unity,
it embraces a system of communism that is impractical and inimical to
human nature, and it neglects the happiness of the individual citizens
(
Politics
II.1–5). In contrast, in Aristotle’s
“best constitution,” each and every citizen will possess
moral virtue and the equipment to carry it out in practice, and
thereby attain a life of excellence and complete happiness (see
VII.13.1332a32–8). All of the citizens will hold political
office and possess private property because “one should call the
city-state happy not by looking at a part of it but at all the
citizens.” (VII.9.1329a22–3). Moreover, there will be a
common system of education for all the citizens, because they share
the same end (
Pol
. VIII.1).
If (as is the case with most existing city-states) the population
lacks the capacities and resources for complete happiness, however,
the lawgiver must be content with fashioning a suitable constitution
(
Politics
IV.11). The second-best system typically takes the
form of a polity (in which citizens possess an inferior, more common
grade of virtue) or mixed constitution (combining features of
democracy, oligarchy, and, where possible, aristocracy, so that no
group of citizens is in a position to abuse its rights). Aristotle
argues that for city-states that fall short of the ideal, the best
constitution is one controlled by a numerous middle class which stands
between the rich and the poor. For those who possess the goods of
fortune in moderation find it “easiest to obey the rule of
reason” (
Politics
IV.11.1295b4–6). They are
accordingly less apt than the rich or poor to act unjustly toward
their fellow citizens. A constitution based on the middle class is the
mean between the extremes of oligarchy (rule by the rich) and
democracy (rule by the poor). “That the middle [constitution] is
best is evident, for it is the freest from faction: where the middle
class is numerous, there least occur factions and divisions among
citizens” (IV.11.1296a7–9). The middle constitution is
therefore both more stable and more just than oligarchy and
democracy.
Although Aristotle classifies democracy as a deviant constitution
(albeit the best of a bad lot), he argues that a case might be made
for popular rule in
Politics
III.11, a discussion which has
attracted the attention of modern democratic theorists. The central
claim is that the many may turn out to be better than the virtuous few
when they come together, even though the many may be inferior when
considered individually. For if each individual has a portion of
virtue and practical wisdom, they may pool these moral assets and turn
out to be better rulers than even a very wise individual. This
argument seems to anticipate treatments of “the wisdom of the
multitude” such as Condorcet’s “jury theorem.”
In recent years, this particular chapter has been widely discussed in
connection with topics such as democratic deliberation and public
reason.
In addition, the political scientist must attend to existing
constitutions even when they are bad. Aristotle notes that “to
reform a constitution is no less a task [of politics] than it is to
establish one from the beginning,” and in this way “the
politician should also help existing constitutions”
(IV.1.1289a1–7). The political scientist should also be
cognizant of forces of political change which can undermine an
existing regime. Aristotle criticizes his predecessors for excessive
utopianism and neglect of the practical duties of a political
theorist. However, he is no Machiavellian. The best constitution still
serves as a regulative ideal by which to evaluate existing
systems.
These topics occupy the remainder of the
Politics
. Books
IV–VI are concerned with the existing constitutions: that is,
the three deviant constitutions, as well as polity or the
“mixed” constitution, which are the best attainable under
most circumstances (IV.2.1289a26–38). The mixed constitution has
been of special interest to scholars because it looks like a
forerunner of modern republican regimes. The whole of book V
investigates the causes and prevention of revolution or political
change (
metabolê
) and civil war or faction
(
stasis
). Books VII–VIII are devoted to the ideal
constitution. As might be expected, Aristotle’s attempt to carry out
this program involves many difficulties, and scholars disagree about
how the two series of books (IV–VI and VII–VIII) are
related to each other: for example, which were written first, which
were intended to be read first, and whether they are ultimately
consistent with each other. Most importantly, when Aristotle offers
practical political prescriptions in Books IV–VI, is he guided
by the best constitution as a regulative ideal, or is he simply
abandoning political idealism and practicing  a form of
Realpolitik?For a further discussion of this topic, see the following
supplementary document:
Supplement: Characteristics and Problems of Aristotle’s Politics
5. Aristotle and Modern Politics
Aristotle has continued to influence thinkers up to the present
throughout the political spectrum, including conservatives (such as
Hannah Arendt, Leo Strauss, and Eric Voegelin), communitarians (such
as Alasdair MacIntyre and Michael Sandel), liberals (such as William
Galston and Martha C. Nussbaum), libertarians (such as Tibor R.
Machan, Douglas B. Rasmussen, and Douglas J. Den Uyl), and democratic
theorists (such as Jill Frank and Gerald M. Mara).
It is not surprising that such diverse political persuasions can lay
claim to Aristotle as a source. For his method often leads to
divergent interpretations. When he deals with a difficult problem, he
is inclined to consider opposing arguments in a careful and nuanced
manner, and he is often willing to concede that there is truth on each
side. For example, though he is critical of democracy, in one passage
he allows that the case for rule by the many based on the superior
wisdom of the multitude “perhaps also involves some truth”
(
Pol.
III.11.1281a39–42). Again, he sometimes applies his own
principles in a questionable manner, for example, when he reasons that
because associations should be governed in a rational manner, the
household should be run by the husband rather than by the wife, whose
rational capacity “lacks authority” (I.13.1260a13). Modern
commentators sympathetic with Aristotle’s general approach often
contend that in this case he applies his own principles
incorrectly–leaving open the question of how they
should
be applied. Further, the way he applies his principles
may have seemed reasonable in his socio-political context–for
example, that the citizen of a polity (normally the best attainable
constitution) must be a hoplite soldier (cf. III.7,1297b4)–but
it may be debatable how these might apply within a modern democratic
nation-state.
The problem of extrapolating to modern political affairs can be
illustrated more fully in connection with Aristotle’s discussion of
legal change in
Politics
II.8. He first lays out the argument
for making the laws changeable. It has been beneficial in the case of
medicine, for example, for it to progress from traditional ways to
improved forms of treatment. An existing law may be a vestige of a
primitive barbaric practice. For instance, Aristotle mentions a law in
Cyme that allows an accuser to produce a number of his own relatives
as witnesses to prove that a defendant is guilty of murder.
“So,” Aristotle concludes, “it is evident from the
foregoing that some laws should sometimes be changed. But to those who
look at the matter from a different angle, caution would seem to be
required” (1269a12–14). Since the law gets its force from the
citizens’ habit of obedience, great care should be exercised in making
any change in it. It may sometimes be better to leave defective laws
in place rather than encouraging lawlessness by changing the laws too
frequently. Moreover, there are the problems of how the laws are to be
changed and who is to change them. Although Aristotle offers valuable
insights, he breaks off the discussion of this topic and never takes
it up elsewhere. We might sum up his view as follows: When it comes to
changing the laws, observe the mean: don’t be too bound by traditional
laws, but on the other hand don’t be overeager in altering them. It is
obvious that this precept, reasonable as it is, leaves considerable
room for disagreement among contemporary
“neo-Aristotelian” theorists. For example, should the laws
be changed to allow self-described transsexual persons to use sexually
segregated restrooms? Conservatives and liberals might agree with
Aristotle’s general stricture regarding legal change but differ widely
on how to apply it in a particular case.
Most scholars of Aristotle advisedly make no attempt to show that he
is aligned with any contemporary ideology. Rather, insofar as they
find him relevant to our times, it is because he offers a remarkable
synthesis of idealism and pragmatism unfolding in deep and
thought-provoking discussions of perennial concerns of political
philosophy: the role of human nature in politics, the relation of the
individual to the state, the place of morality in politics, the theory
of political justice, the rule of law, the analysis and evaluation of
constitutions, the relevance of ideals to practical politics, the
causes and cures of political change and revolution, and the
importance of a morally educated citizenry.
Glossary of Aristotelian Terms
action:
praxis
citizen:
politês
city-state:
polis
(also ‘city’ or
‘state’)
community:
koinônia
constitution:
politeia
(also ‘regime’)
faction:
stasis
(also ‘civil war’)
free:
eleutheros
friendship:
philia
good:
agathos
happiness:
eudaimonia
happy:
eudaimôn
justice:
dikaiosunê
law:
nomos
lawgiver:
nomothetês
master:
despotês
nature:
phusis
noble:
kalon
(also ‘beautiful’ or
‘fine’)
people (
dêmos
)
political:
politikos
(of, or pertaining to, the
polis
)
political science:
politikê
epistêmê
politician:
politikos
(also ‘statesman’)
practical:
praktikos
practical wisdom:
phronêsis
revolution:
metabolê
(also
‘change’)
right:
exousia
(also ‘liberty’)
ruler:
archôn
self-sufficient:
autarkês
sovereign:
kurios
virtue:
aretê
(also ‘excellence’)
without qualification:
haplôs
(also
‘absolute’)
without authority:
akuron
Bibliography
Note on Citations
. Passages in Aristotle are cited as
follows: title of treatise (italics), book (Roman numeral), chapter
(Arabic numeral), line reference. Line references are keyed to the
1831 edition of Immanuel Bekker which had two columns (“a”
and “b”) on each page.
Politics
is abbreviated as
Pol.
and
Nicomachean Ethics
as
NE
. In this
article, “
Pol
. I.2.1252b27”, for example, refers
to
Politics
book I, chapter 2, page 1252, column b, line 27.
Most translations include the Bekker page number with column letter in
the margin followed by every fifth line number.
Passages in Plato are cited in a similar fashion, except the line
references are to the Stephanus edition of 1578 in which pages were
divided into five parts (“a” through “e”).
Caveat on Bibliography.
Although fairly
extensive, this bibliography represents only a fraction of the
secondary literature in English. However, the items cited here contain
many references to other valuable scholarly work in other languages as
well as in English.
A. Greek Text of Aristotle’s
Politics
Dreizehnter, Alois,
Aristoteles’ Politik
, Munich: Wilhelm
Fink, 1970 [generally the most reliable critical edition].
Ross, W. D.,
Aristotelis Politica
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1957.
B. English Translations of Aristotle’s
Politics
Barker, Ernest, revised by Richard Stalley, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1995.
Jowett, Benjamin, revised in
The Complete Works of
Aristotle
(The Revised Oxford Translation), Jonathan Barnes
(ed.), Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984, vol. II, pp.
1986–2129.
Lord, Carnes, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2013, revised
edition.
Rackham, H., Cambridge, London: Harvard University Press,
1932.
Reeve, C. D. C., Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co., 2017 (new
translation).
Simpson, Peter L. P., Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
Press, 1996.
Sinclair, T. A., revised by Trevor J. Saunders, Harmondsworth:
Penguin, 1983.
The Clarendon Aristotle Series (Oxford University Press) includes
translation and commentary of the
Politics
in four
volumes:
Trevor J. Saunders,
Politics
I–II (1995).
Richard Robinson with a supplementary essay by David Keyt,
Politics
III–IV (1995).
David Keyt,
Politics
V–VI (1999).
Richard Kraut,
Politics
VII–VIII (1997).
Also of interest is the
Constitution of Athens
, an
account of the history and workings of the Athenian democracy.
Although it was formerly ascribed to Aristotle, it is now thought by
most scholars to have been written by one of his pupils, perhaps at
his direction toward the end of Aristotle’s life. A reliable
translation with introduction and notes is by P. J. Rhodes,
Aristotle: The Athenian Constitution
. Harmondsworth: Penguin,
1984.
C. Anthologies
Barnes, Jonathan, Malcolm Schofield, and Richard Sorabji (eds.),
Articles on Aristotle
(Volume 2: Ethics and Politics),
London: Duckworth, 1977.
Boudouris, K. J. (ed.),
Aristotelian Political
Philosophy,
2 volumes, Athens: Kardamitsa Publishing Co.,
1995.
Deslauriers, Marguerite, and Pierre Destrée (eds.),
The
Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2013.
Höffe, Otfried (ed.),
Aristoteles Politik
, Berlin:
Akademie Verlag, 2001.
Keyt, David, and Fred D. Miller, Jr. (eds.),
A Companion to
Aristotle’s Politics
, Oxford: Blackwell, 1991.
Kraut, Richard, and Steven Skultety (eds.),
Aristotle’s
Politics: Critical Essays
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield,
2005.
Lockwood, Thornton, and Thanassis Samaras (eds.),
Aristotle’s
Politics: A Critical Guide
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2015.
Lord, Carnes, and David O’Connor (eds.),
Essays on the
Foundations of Aristotelian Political Science
, Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1991.
Patzig, Günther (ed.),
Aristoteles’ Politik: Akten des
XI. Symposium Aristotelicum
, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht, 1990.
D. Single-authored Commentaries and Overviews
Aquinas, Thomas,
Commentary on Aristotle’s Politics
,
translated by Richard J. Regan, Indianapolis Publishing Co.: Hackett,
2007.
Barker, Ernest,
The Political Thought of Plato and
Aristotle
, London: Methuen, 1906; reprinted, New York: Russell
& Russell, 1959.
Bodéüs, Richard,
The Political Dimensions of
Aristotle’s Ethics
, Albany: SUNY Press, 1993.
Brill, Sara,
Aristotle on the Concept of the Shared Life
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020.
Hansen, Mogens Herman,
Reflections on Aristotle’s
Politics
, Copenhagen: Tusculaneum Press, 2013.
Keyt, David,
Nature and Justice: Studies in the Ethical and
Political Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle
, Leuven: Peeters,
2017.
Kontos, Pavlos,
Aristotle on the Scope of Practical Reason:
Spectators, Legislators, Hopes, and Evils
, Abingdon, New York:
Routledge, 2021.
Kraut, Richard,
Aristotle: Political Philosophy
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2002.
Miller, Fred D., Jr.,
Nature, Justice, and Rights in
Aristotle’s Politics
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Mulgan, Richard G.,
Aristotle’s Political Theory
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1977.
Newman, W. L.,
The Politics of Aristotle
, 4 vols. Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1887–1902; reprinted Salem, NH: Ayer,
1985.
Nichols, Mary,
Citizens and Statesmen: A Study of Aristotle’s
Politics
, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 1992.
Pangle, Lorraine Smith,
Reason and Character: The Moral
Foundations of Aristotelian Political Philosophy
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2020.
Pellegrin, Pierre,
Endangered Excellent: On the Political
Philosophy of Aristotle
, translated by Anthony Preus, Albany, NY:
SUNY Press, 2020.
Riesbeck, David J.,
Aristotle on Political Community
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2016.
Roberts, Jean,
Routledge Philosophy Guidebook to Aristotle and
the Politics
, London and New York: Routledge, 2009.
Schütrumpf, Eckart,
Aristoteles: Politik
, 4 vols.
Berlin and Darmstadt: Akademie Verlag, 1999–2005.
Simpson, Peter,
A Philosophical Commentary on the Politics of
Aristotle
, Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press,
1998.
Strauss, Leo, “On Aristotle’s Politics,” in
The
City and Man
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1964, pp.
13–49.
Susemihl, Franz, and R. D. Hicks,
The Politics of
Aristotle
, London: Macmillan, 1894. [Includes books
I–III and VII–VIII renumbered as IV–V.]
Trott, Adriel M.,
Aristotle on the Nature of Community
,
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Veogelin, Eric,
Order and History
(Vol. III:
Plato and Aristotle
), Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State
University Press, 1977.
Yack, Bernard,
The Problems of a Political Animal: Community,
Justice, and Conflict in Aristotelian Political Thought
,
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1993.
E. Studies of Particular Topics
1. Biographical and Textual Studies
Barker, Ernest, “The Life of Aristotle and the Composition
and Structure of the
Politics
,”
Classical
Review
, 45 (1931), 162–72.
Jaeger, Werner,
Aristotle: Fundamentals of the History of His
Development
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1948.
Kelsen, Hans, “Aristotle and the Hellenic-Macedonian
Policy,” in Jonathan Barnes et al. (eds.),
Articles on
Aristotle
(Volume 2: Ethics and Politics), London: Duckworth,
1977, pp. 170–94.
Lord, Carnes, “The Character and Composition of Aristotle’s
Politics
,”
Political Theory
, 9 (1981),
459–78.
2. Methodology and Foundations of Aristotle’s Political Theory
Adkins, A. W. H., “The Connection between Aristotle’s
Ethics
and
Politics
,” in David Keyt and Fred
D. Miller, Jr. (eds.),
A Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
,
Oxford: Blackwell, 1991, pp. 75–93.
Cherry, Kevin M.,
Plato, Aristotle and the Purpose of
Politics
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Depew, David J., “The Ethics of Aristotle’s
Politics
,” in Ryan K. Balot (ed.),
A Companion to
Greek and Roman Political Thought
, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009,
pp. 399–418.
Frank Jill, “On
Logos
and Politics in
Aristotle,” in Thornton Lockwood and Thanassis Samaras (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: A Critical Guide
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2015, pp. 9–26.
Frede, Dorothea, “The Political Character of Aristotle’s
Ethics,” in Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée
(eds.),
The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 14–37.
Gerson, Lloyd, “On the Scientific Character of
Aristotle’s Politics,” in K. I. Boudouris, K. I. (ed.),
Aristotelian Political Philosophy,
Athens: Kardamitsa
Publishing Co., 1995, vol. I, pp. 35–50.
Irwin, Terence H., “Moral Science and Political Theory in
Aristotle,”
History of Political Thought
, 6 (1985), pp.
150–68.
Kahn, Charles H., “The Normative Structure of Aristotle’s
Politics
,” in Günther Patzig (ed.)
Aristoteles’ ‘Politik’
, Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1990, pp. 369–84.
Kamtekar, Rachana, “The Relationship between
Aristotle’s Ethical and Political Discourses (
NE
X
9),” in Ronald Polansky (ed.),
The Cambridge Companion to
Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics
. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press, 2014, pp. 370–82.
Keyt, David, “Aristotle’s Political Philosophy,” in
David Keyt,
Nature and Justice: Studies in the Ethical and
Political Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle
, Leuven: Peeters,
2017, 165–95.
Lockwood, Thornton, “
Politics
II: Political
Critique, Political Theorizing, Political Innovation,” in
Thornton Lockwood and Thanassis Samaras (eds.),
Aristotle’s
Politics: A Critical Guide
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 2015, pp. 64–83.
Miller, Fred D., Jr.,  “The Unity of Aristotle’s
Ethics and Politics,” in David Konstan and David Sider (eds.),
Philoderma: Essays in Greek and Roman Philosophy in Honor of
Phillip Mitsis
(Siracusa: Parnassos Press, 2022), pp.
215–43.
Ober, Joshua, “Aristotle’s Political Sociology: Class,
Status, and Order in the
Politics
,” in Carnes Lord and
David O’Connor (eds.),
Essays on the Foundations of Aristotelian
Political Science
, Berkeley: University of California Press,
1991.
Pellegrin, Pierre, “On the ‘Platonic’ Part of
Aristotle’s
Politics
,” in William Wians (ed.)
Aristotle’s Philosophical Development
, Lanham, MD: Rowman
& Littlefield, 1996, pp. 347–59.
–––, “Is Politics a Natural
Science?” in Thornton Lockwood and Thanassis Samaras (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: A Critical Guide
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2015, pp. 27–45.
–––, “Aristotle’s
Politics
,” in Christopher Shields (ed.),
The Oxford
Handbook of Aristotle
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012, pp.
558–85.
Peonids, F., “The Relation between the
Nicomachean
Ethics
and the
Politics
Revisited,”
History of
Political Thought
22 (2001): 1–12.
Rowe, Christopher J., “Aims and Methods in Aristotle’s
Politics
,” in David Keyt and Fred D. Miller, Jr.
(eds.),
A Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Oxford:
Blackwell, 1991, pp. 57–74.
Salkever, Stephen G., “Aristotle’s Social Science,”
Political Theory
, 9 (1981), pp. 479–508; reprinted in
Richard Kraut and Steven Skultety (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics:
Critical Essays
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2005, pp.
27–64.
–––,
Finding the Mean: Theory and Practice
in Aristotelian Political Philosophy
, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1990.
Santas, Gerasimos X.,“The Relation between Aristotle’s
Ethics and Politics,” in K. I. Boudouris, K. I. (ed.),
Aristotelian Political Philosophy,
Athens: Kardamitsa
Publishing Co., 1995, vol. I, pp. 160–76.
Smith, Nicholas D. and Robert Mayhew, “Aristotle on What the
Political Scientist Needs to Know,” in K. I. Boudouris (ed.)
Aristotelian Political Philosophy
, Athens: International
Center for Greek Philosophy and Culture, 1995, vol. I, pp.
189–98.
Vander Waerdt, Paul A., “The Political Intention of
Aristotle’s Moral Philosophy,”
Ancient Philosophy
5 (1985), 77–89.
–––,  “The Plan and Intention of
Aristotle’s Ethical and Political Writings,”
Illinois
Classical Studies
16 (1991), 231–53.
3. Political Naturalism
Ambler, Wayne, “Aristotle’s Understanding of the Naturalness
of the City,”
Review of Politics
, 47 (1985),
163–85.
Annas, Julia, “Aristotle on Human Nature and Political
Virtue,”
The Review of Metaphysics
, 49 (1996),
731–54.
Berryman, Sylvia,
Aristotle on the Sources of the Ethical
Life
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2919, esp. Ch. 3
“Naturalism in Aristotle’s
Politics.
”
Chan, Joseph, “Does Aristotle’s Political Theory Rest on a
Blunder?”
History of Political Thought
, 13 (1992),
189–202.
Chappell, Timothy, “‘Naturalism’ in Aristotle’s
Political Philosophy,” in Ryan K. Balot (ed.),
A Companion
to Greek and Roman Political Thought
, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell,
2009, pp. 382–98.
Cherry, K. and E. A. Goerner, “Does Aristotle’s Polis Exist
‘By Nature’?”
History of Political Thought
,
27 (2006), 563–85.
Cooper, John M., “Political Animals and Civic
Friendship,” in Günther Patzig (ed.),
Aristoteles’
‘Politik’
, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht, 1990, pp. 220–41; reprinted in Richard Kraut and
Steven Skultety (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: Critical
Essays
, Lanham MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2005, pp.
65–89.
DePew, David J., “Humans and Other Political Animals in
Aristotle’s
Historia Animalium
,”
Phronesis
, 40
(1995), 156–76.
–––, “Political Animals and the Genealogy
of the
Polis
: Aristotle’s
Politics
and
Plato’s
Statesman
,” in Geert Keil and Nora Kreft
(eds.),
Aristotle’s Anthropology
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2019, pp. 238–57.
Everson, Stephen, “Aristotle on the Foundations of the
State,”
Political Studies
, 36 (1988),
89–101.
Karbowski, Joseph, “Political Animals and Human Nature in
Aristotle’s
Politics
,” in Geert Keil and Nora
Kreft (eds.),
Aristotle’s Anthropology
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2019, pp. 221–37.
Keyt, David, “The Meaning of BIOS in Aristotle’s
Ethics
and
Politics
,”
Ancient
Philosophy
, 9 (1989), 15–21; reprinted in David Keyt,
Nature and Justice: Studies in the Ethical and Political
Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle
, Leuven: Peeters, 2017,
101–9.
–––, “Three Basic Theorems in Aristotle’s
Politics
,” in David Keyt and Fred D. Miller, Jr.
(eds.),
A Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Oxford:
Blackwell, 1991, pp. 118–41; reprinted in David Keyt,
Nature and Justice: Studies in the Ethical and Political
Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle
, Leuven: Peeters, 2017,
111–38.
Kullmann, Wolfgang, “Man as a Political Animal in
Aristotle,” in David Keyt and Fred D. Miller, Jr. (eds.),
A
Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Oxford: Blackwell, 1991, pp.
94–117.
Lloyd, Geoffrey, “Aristotle on the Natural Sociability,
Skills and Intelligence of Animals,” in Verity Harte and Melissa
Lane (eds.),
Politeia in Greek and Roman Philosophy
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 277–94.
Miller, Fred D., Jr., “Aristotle: Naturalism,” in
Christopher J. Rowe and Malcolm Schofield (eds.),
The Cambridge
History of Greek and Roman Political Thought
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000, pp. 321–43.
Mulgan, Richard, “Aristotle’s Doctrine that Man is a
Political Animal,”
Hermes
, 102 (1974),
438–45.
Reeve, C. D. C., “The Naturalness of the Polis in
Aristotle,” in Georgios Anagnostopoulos (ed.),
A Companion
to Aristotle
, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009, pp.
512–25.
Roberts, Jean, “Political Animals in the
Nicomachean
Ethics
,”
Phronesis
, 34 (1989), 185–202.
4. Household: Women, Children, and Slaves
Booth, William James, “Politics and the Household: A
Commentary on Aristotle’s
Politics
Book One,”
History of Political Thought
, 2 (1981), 203–26.
Brunt, P. A., “Aristotle and Slavery,” in
Studies
in Greek History and Thought
, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1993, pp. 434–88.
Chambliss, J. J., “Aristotle’s Conception of Children and
the Poliscraft,”
Educational Studies
, 13 (1982),
33–43.
Cole, Eve Browning, “Women, Slaves, and ‘Love of
Toil’ in Aristotle’s Moral Psychology,” in Bat-Ami Bar On
(ed.),
Engendering Origins: Critical Feminist Readings in Plato
and Aristotle
, Albany: SUNY Press, 1994, pp. 127–44.
Deslauriers, Marguerite, “The Virtues of Women and
Slaves,”
Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy
, 25
(2003), 213–31.
–––, “Political Rule Over Women in
Politics
,” in Thornton Lockwood and Thanassis Samaras
(eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: A Critical Guide
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2015, pp. 46–63.
Fortenbaugh, W. W., “Aristotle on Slaves and Women,”
in Jonathan Barnes et al. (eds.),
Articles on Aristotle
, vol.
2, Ethics and Politics. London: Duckworth, 1977, pp. 135–9.
Frank, Jill, “Citizens, Slaves, and Foreigners: Aristotle on
Human Nature,”
American Political Science Review
, 98
(2004), 91–104.
Freeland, Cynthia,
Feminist Interpretations of Aristotle
,
University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1998.
Garnsey, Peter,
Ideas of Slavery from Aristotle to
Augustine
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Lindsay, Thomas K., “Was Aristotle Racist, Sexist, and
Anti-Democratic?: A Review Essay,”
Review of Politics
56 (1994), 127–51.
Lockwood, Thornton, “Justice in Aristotle’s Household and
City,”
Polis
, 20 (2003), 1–21.
–––, “Is Natural Slavery
Beneficial?”
Journal of the History of Philosophy
, 45
(2007), 207–21.
Mayhew, Robert,
The Female in Aristotle’s Biology: Reason or
Rationalization
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2004.
Modrak, Deborah, “Aristotle: Women, Deliberation, and
Nature,” in Bat-Ami Bar On (ed.),
Engendering Origins:
Critical Feminist Readings in Plato and Aristotle
, Albany: SUNY
Press, 1994, pp. 207–21.
Mulgan, Robert G., “Aristotle and the Political Role of
Women,”
History of Political Thought
, 15 (1994),
179–202.
Nagle, D. Brendan,
The Household as the Foundation of
Aristotle’s Polis
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
2006.
Pellegrin, Pierre, “Natural Slavery,” in Marguerite
Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée (eds.),
The Cambridge
Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2013, pp. 92–116.
Saxenhouse, Arlene W., “Family, Polity, and Unity: Aristotle
on Socrates’ Community of Wives,”
Polity
, 15 (1982),
202–19.
Schofield, Malcolm, “Ideology and Philosophy in Aristotle’s
Theory of Slavery,” in Günther Patzig (ed.)
Aristoteles’ ‘Politik’
, Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1990, pp. 1–27; reprinted in Richard
Kraut and Steven Skultety (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: Critical
Essays
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2005, pp.
91–119.
Senack, Christine M., “Aristotle on the Woman’s Soul,”
in Bat-Ami Bar On (ed.),
Engendering Origins: Critical Feminist
Readings in Plato and Aristotle
, Albany: SUNY Press, 1994, pp.
223–36.
Simpson, Peter, “Aristotle’s Criticism of Socrates’
Communism of Wives and Children,”
Apeiron
, 24 (1991),
99–114.
Smith, Nicholas D., “Plato and Aristotle on the Nature of
Women,”
Journal of the History of Philosophy
, 21
(1983), 467–78.
–––, “Aristotle’s Theory of Natural
Slavery,” in David Keyt and Fred D. Miller, Jr. (eds.),
A
Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Oxford: Blackwell, 1991, pp.
142–55.
Spelman, E. V., “Aristotle and the Politicization of the
Soul,” in Sandra Harding and M. B. Hintikka (eds)
Discovering Reality: Feminist Perspectives on Epistemology,
Metaphysics, Methodology, and Philosophy of Science
, Dordrecht:
D. Reidel, 1983, pp. 17–30.
–––, “Who’s Who in the Polis,” in
Bat-Ami Bar On (ed.),
Engendering Origins: Critical Feminist
Readings in Plato and Aristotle
, Albany: SUNY Press, 1994, pp.
99–125.
Stauffer, Dana J., “Aristotle’s Account of the Subjection of
Women,”
Journal of Politics
, 70 (2008),
929–41.
5. Political Economy
Ambler, Wayne H., “Aristotle on Acquisition,”
Canadian Journal of Political Science
, 17 (1984),
487–502.
Crespo, Ricardo F.,
A Re-assessment of
Aristotle
’
s Economic Thought
. London: Routledge,
2014.
Dobbs, Darrell, “Aristotle’s Anticommunism,”
American Journal of Political Science
, 29 (1985),
29–46.
Finley, M. I., “Aristotle and Economic Analysis,” in
Jonathan Barnes et al. (eds.),
Articles on Aristotle
, vol. 2,
Ethics and Politics. London: Duckworth, 1977, pp. 140–58.
Gallagher, Robert L.,
Aristotle’s Critique of Political
Economy with a Contemporary Application.
London: Routledge,
2018.
Hadreas, Peter, “Aristotle on the Vices and Virtue of
Wealth,”
Journal of Business Ethics,
39
(2002), 361–76.
Hartman, Edwin M., “Virtue, Profit, and the Separation
Thesis: An Aristotelian View,”
Journal of Business Ethics
,99 (2011), 5–17.
–––,
Virtue in Business: Conversations with
Aristotle
. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013.
Inamura, Kazutaka, “The Role of Reciprocity in Aristotle’s
Theory of Political Economy,”
History of Political
Thought
, 32 (2011), 565–87.
Irwin, Terence H., “Aristotle’s Defense of Private
Property,” in David Keyt and Fred D. Miller, Jr. (eds.).
A
Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Oxford: Blackwell, 1991, pp.
200–25.
Judson, Lindsay, “Aristotle on Fair Exchange,”
Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy
, 15 (1997),
147–75.
Keyt, David, “Aristotle and the Joy of Working,” in
David Keyt,
Nature and Justice: Studies in the Ethical and
Political Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle
, Leuven: Peeters,
2017, pp. 223–39.
Mathie, William,“Property in the Political Science of
Aristotle,” in Anthony Parel & Thomas Flanagan(eds.),
Theories of Property: Aristotle to the Present
. Waterloo,
Ont.: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 1979, pp. 12–35.
Mayhew, Robert, “Aristotle on Property,”
The
Review of Metaphysics
, 46 (1993), 802–31.
McNeill, D., “Alternative Interpretations of Aristotle on
Exchange and Reciprocity,”
Public Affairs Quarterly
, 4
(1990), 55–68.
Mei, Todd S., “The Preeminence of Use: Reevaluating the
Relation between Use and Exchange in Aristotle’s Economic
Thought,”
American Journal of the History of Philosophy
47 (2009), 523–48.
Meikle, Scott, “Aristotle on Money”
Phronesis
39 (1994), 26–44.
–––,
Aristotle’s Economic Thought
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995.
Miller, Fred D. Jr., “Property Rights in Aristotle,”
in Richard Kraut and Steven Skultety (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics:
Critical Essays
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2005, pp.
121–44.
–––, “Was Aristotle the First
Economist?”
Apeiron
, 31 (1998), 387–98.
–––, “Aristotle and Business: Friend or
Foe?” in Eugene Heath and Byron Kaldis (eds.),
Wealth,
Commerce and Philosophy: Foundational Thinkers and Business
Ethics
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2017, pp.
31–52.
Morris, Tom,
If Aristotle Ran General Motors: The New Soul of
Business
, New York: Henry Holt, 1997.
Nielsen, Karen Margrethe, “Economy and Private
Property,” in Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée
(eds.),
The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 67–91.
Solomon, Robert C., “Corporate Roles, Personal Virtues: An
Aristotelian Approach to Business Ethics,”
Business Ethics
Quarterly
, 2 (1992), 317–39.
–––, “Aristotle, Ethics, and Business
Organizations,”
Organization Studies,
25
(2004), 1021–43.
6. Political Justice and Injustice
Brunschwig, Jacques, “The Aristotelian Theory of
Equity,” in Michael Frede and Gisela Striker (eds.),
Rationality in Greek Thought
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 115–55.
Marguerite Deslauriers, “Political Unity and
Inequality,” in Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée
(eds.),
The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 117–43.
Georgiadis, Constantine, “Equitable and Equity in
Aristotle,” in Spiro Panagiotou (ed.),
Justice, Law and
Method in Plato and Aristotle
, Edmonton: Academic Printing &
Publishing, 1987, pp. 159–72.
Keyt, David, “Aristotle’s Theory of Distributive
Justice,” in David Keyt and Fred D. Miller, Jr. (eds.),
A
Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Oxford: Blackwell, 1991, pp.
238–78.
–––, “The Good Man and the Upright Citizen
in Aristotle’s
Ethics
and
Politics
,” in
David Keyt and Fred D. Miller, Jr. (eds.),
Freedom, Reason, and
the Polis: Essays in Ancient Greek Political Philosophy
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007, 220–40. Reprinted
in David Keyt,
Nature and Justice: Studies in the Ethical and
Political Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle
, Leuven: Peeters,
2017, 197–221.
–––, “Nature and Justice,” in David Keyt,
Nature and Justice: Studies in the Ethical and Political
Philosophy of Plato and Aristotle
, Leuven: Peeters, 2017, pp.
1–19.
Lockwood, Thornton, “Polity, Political Justice, and
Political Mixing,”
History of Political Thought
, 27
(2006), 207–22.
Morrison, Donald, “The Common Good,” in Marguerite
Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée (eds.),
The Cambridge
Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2013, pp. 176–98.
Nussbaum, Martha C., “Nature, Function, and Capability:
Aristotle on Political Distribution,” in Günther Patzig
(ed.),
Aristoteles’ ‘Politik’
, Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1990, pp. 153–87.
Roberts, Jean, “Justice and the Polis,” in Christopher
J. Rowe and Malcolm Schofield (eds.),
The Cambridge History of
Greek and Roman Political Thought
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2000, pp. 344–65.
Rosler, Andrés, “Civic Virtue: Citizenship,
Ostracism, and War,” in Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre
Destrée (eds.),
The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s
Politics
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp.
144–75.
Saxonhouse, Arlene W., “Aristotle on the Corruption of
Regimes: Resentment and Justice,” in Thornton Lockwood and
Thanassis Samaras (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: A Critical
Guide
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015, pp.
184–203.
Schütrumpf, Eckart, “Little to Do With Justice:
Aristotle on Distributing Political Power,” in Thornton Lockwood
and Thanassis Samaras (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: A Critical
Guide
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015, pp.
163–83.
Young, Charles M., “Aristotle on Justice,”
The
Southern Journal of Philosophy
, 27 (1988), 233–49.
Zingano, Marco, “Natural, Ethical, and Political
Justice,” in Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée
(eds.),
The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 199–222.
7. Political Friendship and Enmity
Cooper, John M., “Political Animals and Civic
Friendship,” in Günther Patzig (ed.),
Aristoteles’
‘Politik’
, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht, 1990, pp. 220–41; reprinted in Richard Kraut and
Steven Skultety (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: Critical
Essays
, Lanham MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2005, pp.
65–89.
Hatzistavrou, Antony, “Faction,” in Marguerite
Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée (eds.),
The Cambridge
Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2013, pp. 301–23.
Irrera, Elena, “Between Advantage and Virtue:
Aristotle’s Theory of Political Friendship,”
History
of Political Thought
, 26 (2005), 565–85.
Jang, Misung, “Aristotle’s Political Friendship as
Solidarity,” in Liesbeth Huppes-Cluysenaer, & Nuno M.S.
Coelho (eds.),
Aristotle on Emotions in Law and Politics,
Dordrecht: Springer, 2018. pp. 417–33.
Kalimtzis, Kostas,
Aristotle on Political Enmity and Disease:
An Inquiry into Stasis
, Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press, 2000.
Kreft, Nora, “Aristotle on Friendship and Being
Human,” in Geert Keil and Nora Kreft (eds.),
Aristotle’s Anthropology
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2019, pp. 182–99.
Kronman, Anthony, “Aristotle’s Idea of Political
Fraternity,”
American Journal of Jurisprudence
, 24
(1979),114–138.
Leontsini, Eleni, “The Motive of Society: Aristotle on Civic
Friendship, Justice, and Concord,”
Res Publica
, 19
(2013), 21–35.
Ludwig, Paul W.,
Rediscovering Political Friendship:
Aristotle’s Theory and Modern Identity, Community, and Equality
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020.
Miller, Fred D., Jr., “Aristotle on Deviant
Constitutions,” in K. I. Boudouris, K. I. (ed.),
Aristotelian Political Philosophy,
Athens: Kardamitsa
Publishing Co., 1995, vol. II, pp. 105–15.
Mulgan, Richard, “The Role of Friendship in
Aristotle’s Political Theory,” in Preston King, and
Heather Devere (eds.),
The Challenge to Friendship in
M
odernity
, London: Frank Cass, 2000, pp.
15–32.
Schofield, Malcolm, “Political Friendship and the Ideology
of Reciprocity,” in
Saving the City
, London: Routledge,
1999, pp. 82–99.
Schwarzenbach, Sibyl, “On Civic Friendship,”
Ethics
, 107 (1996), 97–128.
Skultety, Steven C.,. “Defining Aristotle’s Conception
of
Stasis
in the
Politics
,”
Phronesis
54 (2009), 346–70.
–––,
Conflict in
Aristotle
’
s Political Philosophy
, Albany
NY: State University of New York Press, 2019.
Sosa, Javier Echeñique & Jose Antonio Errázuriz
Besa, “Aristotle on Personal Enmity,”
Ancient
Philosophy
, 62 (2022), 215–31.
Ward, Ann, “Friendship and politics in Aristotle’s
Nicomachean Ethics
,”
European Journal of Political
Theory
, 10 (2011), 443–62.
Weed, Ronald,
Aristotle on Stasis: A Psychology of Political
Conflict
, Berlin: Logos Verlag, 2007.
Yack, Bernard, “Community and Conflict in Aristotle’s
Political Philosophy,”
Review of Politics
, 47
(1985), 92–112.
–––,   “Natural Right and
Aristotle’s Understanding of Justice,”
Political
Theory
, 18 (1990), 216–37.
8. Citizenship, Civic Obligation, and Political Rights
Allan, D. J., “Individual and State in the
Ethics
and
Politics
,”
Entretiens sur l’Antiquité
Classique IX, La ‘Politique’ d’Aristote
, Geneva:
Fondation Hardt, 1964, pp. 53–95.
Barnes, Jonathan, “Aristotle and Political Liberty,”
in Günther Patzig (ed.),
Aristoteles’
‘Politik’
, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht, 1990, pp. 249–63; reprinted in Richard Kraut and
Steven Skultety (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: Critical
Essays
, Lanham MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2005, pp.
185–201.
Collins, Susan D.,
Aristotle and the Rediscovery of
Citizenship
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006.
Frede, Dorothea, “Citizenship in Aristotle’s
Politics
,” in Richard Kraut and Steven Skultety (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: Critical Essays
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and
Littlefield, 2005, pp. 167–84.
Horn, Christoph, “Law, Governance, and Political
Obligation,” in Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée
(eds.),
The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 223–46.
Irwin, Terence H., “The Good of Political Activity,”
in Günther Patzig (ed.),
Aristoteles’
‘Politik’
, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht, 1990, pp. 73–98.
Kraut, Richard, “Are There Natural Rights in
Aristotle?”
The Review of Metaphysics
, 49 (1996),
755–74.
Lane, Melissa, “Claims to Rule: The Case of the
Mutlitude,” in Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée
(eds.),
The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 247–74.
Long, Roderick T., “Aristotle’s Conception of
Freedom,”
The Review of Metaphysics
, 49 (1996),
775–802; reprinted in Richard O. Brooks and James Bernard Murphy
(eds.),
Aristotle and Modern Law
, Aldershot Hants, UK:
Ashgate Publishing Co., 2003, pp. 384–410.
Miller, Fred D., Jr., “Aristotle and the Origins of Natural
Rights,”
The Review of Metaphysics
, 49 (1996),
873–907.
–––, “Aristotle’s Theory of Political
Rights,” in Richard O. Brooks and James Bernard Murphy (eds.),
Aristotle and Modern Law
, Aldershot Hants, UK: Ashgate
Publishing Co., 2003, pp. 309–50.
Morrison, Donald, “Aristotle’s Definition of Citizenship: A
Problem and Some Solutions,”
History of Philosophy
Quarterly
, 16 (1999), 143–65.
Mulgan, Robert G., “Aristotle and the Value of Political
Participation,”
Political Theory
, 18 (1990),
195–215.
Roberts, Jean, “Excellences of the Citizen and of the
Individual,” in Georgios Anagnostopoulos (ed.),
A Companion
to Aristotle
, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009, pp.
555–65.
Rosler, Andrés, “Civic Virtue: Citizenship,
Ostracism, and War,” in Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre
Destrée (eds.),
The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s
Politics
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp.
144–75.
Samaras, Thanassis, “Aristotle and the Question of
Citizenship,” in Thornton Lockwood and Thanassis Samaras (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: A Critical Guide
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2015, pp. 123–41.
Schofield, Malcolm, “Sharing in the Constitution,”
The Review of Metaphysics
, 49 (1996), 831–58; reprinted
in Richard O. Brooks and James Bernard Murphy (eds.),
Aristotle
and Modern Law
, Aldershot Hants, UK: Ashgate Publishing Co.,
2003, pp. 353–80.
Zuckert, Catherine H., “Aristotle on the Limits and
Satisfactions of Political Life,”
Interpretation
, 11
(1983), 185–206.
9. Constitutional Theory
Balot, Ryan, “The ‘Mixed Regime’ In Aristotle’s
Politics
,” in Thornton Lockwood and Thanassis Samaras
(eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: A Critical Guide
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2015, pp. 103–22.
Bates, Clifford A.,
Aristotle’s “Best Regime”:
Kingship, Democracy, and the Rule of Law
, Baton Rouge: Louisiana
State University Press, 2003.
Bobonich, Christopher, “Aristotle, Decision Making, and the
Many,” in Thornton Lockwood and Thanassis Samaras (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: A Critical Guide
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2015, pp. 142–62.
Cherry, Kevin M., “The Problem of Polity: Political
Participation in Aristotle’s Best Regime,”
Journal of
Politics
, 71 (2009), 406–21.
Coby, Patrick, “Aristotle’s Three Cities and the Problem of
Faction,”
Journal of Politics
, 50 (1988),
896–919.
Destrée, Pierre, “Aristotle on Improving Imperfect
Cities,” in Thornton Lockwood and Thanassis Samaras (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: A Critical Guide
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2015, pp. 204–23.
Dietz, Mary G., “Between Polis and Empire: Aristotle’s
Politics
,”
American Political Science Review
106 (2012), 275–93.
Garsten, Bryan, “Deliberating and Acting Together,” in
Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée (eds.),
The
Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2013, pp. 324–49.
Huxley, G., “On Aristotle’s Best State,” in Paul
Cartledge and F. D. Harvey (eds.),
Crux: Essays Presented to G. E.
M. de Ste. Croix
, London: Duckworth, 1985, pp. 139–49.
Johnson, Curtis N.,
Aristotle’s Theory of the State
, New
York: Macmillan, 1990.
Keyt, David, “Aristotle and Anarchism,”
Reason
Papers
, 18 (1993), 133–52; reprinted in Richard Kraut and
Steven Skultety.
Aristotle’s Politics: Critical Essays
,
Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2005, pp. 203–22.
Kraut, Richard, “Aristotle’s Critique of False
Utopias,” in Otfried Höffe (ed.),
Aristoteles
Politik
, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2001, pp. 59–73.
Lintott, Andrew, “Aristotle and Democracy,”
The
Classical Quarterly
(New Series), 42 (1992), 114–28.
Mayhew, Robert,
Aristotle’s Criticism of Plato’s
Republic
, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 1997.
–––, “Rulers and Ruled,” in Georgios
Anagnostopoulos (ed.),
A Companion to Aristotle
, Oxford:
Wiley-Blackwell, 2009, pp. 526–39.
Miller, Fred D., Jr., “Aristotle on the Ideal
Constitution,” in Georgios Anagnostopoulos (ed.),
A
Companion to Aristotle
, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009, pp.
540–54.
–––, “The Rule of Reason,” in
Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée (eds.),
The
Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2013, pp. 38–66.
Mulgan, Richard, “Aristotle’s Analysis of Oligarchy and
Democracy,” in David Keyt and Fred D. Miller, Jr. (eds.),
A
Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Oxford: Blackwell, 1991, pp.
307–22.
–––, “Constitutions and the Purpose of the
State,” in Otfried Höffe (ed.),
Aristoteles
Politik
, Berlin: Akademie Verlag, 2001, pp. 93–106.
Mulhern, J. J., “
Politeia
in Greek Literature,
Inscriptions, and in Aristotle’s
Politics
: Reflections on
Translation and Interpretation,” in Thornton Lockwood and
Thanassis Samaras (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: A Critical
Guide
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015, pp.
84–102.
Murray, O., “Polis and
Politeia
in
Aristotle,” in Mogens Herman Hansen (ed.),
The Ancient Greek
City-State
, Copenhagen: Muksgaard, 1993, pp. 197–210.
Ober, Joshua, “Aristotle’s Natural Democracy,” in
Richard Kraut and Steven Skultety (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics:
Critical Essays
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2005, pp.
223–43.
–––, “Democracy’s Wisdom: An Aristotelian
Middle Way for Collective Judgment,”
American Political
Science Review
, 107 (2013), 104–22.
–––, “Nature, History, and Aristotle’s
Best Possible Regime,” in Thornton Lockwood and Thanassis
Samaras (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: A Critical Guide
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2015, pp. 224–43.
Polansky, Ronald, “Aristotle on Political Change,” in
David Keyt and Fred D. Miller, Jr. (eds.),
A Companion to
Aristotle’s Politics
, Oxford: Blackwell, 1991, pp.
322–45.
Rosler, Andres,
Political Authority and Obligation in
Aristotle
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
Rowe, C. J., “Reality and Utopia,”
Elenchos
,
10 (1989), 317–36.
–––, “Aristotelian Constitutions,”
in Christopher J. Rowe and Malcolm Schofield (eds.),
The Cambridge
History of Greek and Roman Political Thought
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2000, pp. 366–89.
Strauss, Barry, “On Aristotle’s Critique of Athenian
Democracy,” in Carnes Lord and David O’Connor (eds.),
Essays
on the Foundations of Aristotelian Political Science
, Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1991, pp. 212–33.
Vander Waert, Paul A., “Kingship and Philosophy in
Aristotle’s Best Regime,”
Phronesis
, 30 (1985),
249–73.
Waldron, Jeremy, “The Wisdom of the Multitude: Some
Reflections on Book 3, Chapter 11 of Aristotle’s
Politics
,”
Political Theory
, 20 (1992),
613–41; reprinted in Richard Kraut and Steven Skultety (eds.),
Aristotle’s Politics: Critical Essays
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and
Littlefield, 2005, pp. 145–65.
Wilson, James L., “Deliberation, Democracy, and the Rule of
Reason in Aristotle’s
Politics
,”
American Political
Science Review
, 105 (2011), 259–74.
10. Education
Burnyeat, Myles F., “Aristotle on Learning to Be
Good,” in Amelie O. Rorty (ed.),
Essays on Aristotle’s
Ethics
, Berkeley: University of California Press, 1980, pp.
69–92.
Curren, Randall R.,
Aristotle on the Necessity of Public
Education
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2000.
Depew, David J., “Politics, Music, and Contemplation in
Aristotle’s Ideal State,” in David Keyt and Fred D. Miller, Jr.
(eds.),
A Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
, Oxford:
Blackwell, 1991, pp. 346–80.
Destrée, Pierre, “Education, Leisure, and
Politics,” in Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée
(eds.),
The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 301–23.
Frede, Dorothea, “The Deficiency of Human Nature: The Task
of a ‘Philosophy of Human Nature’,” in Geert Keil
and Nora Kreft (eds.),
Aristotle’s Anthropology
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2019, pp. 258–74.
Jimenez, Marta,
Aristotle on Shame and Learning to Be
Good
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2021.
Kraut, Richard, “Aristotle on Method and Moral
Education,” in Jyl Gentzler (ed.),
Method in Ancient
Philosophy
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998, pp.
171–90.
–––, “Aristotle on Becoming Good:
Habituation, Reflection, and Perception,” in Christopher Shields
(ed.),
The Oxford Handbook of Aristotle
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2012, pp. 529–57.
Lord, Carnes,
Education and Culture in the Political Thought
of Aristotle
, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1982.
Lynch, John Patrick,
Aristotle’s School
, Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1972.
Muzio, G. D., “Aristotle on Improving One’s
Character,”
Phronesis
, 45 (2000), 205–19.
Reeve, C. D. C,  “Aristotelian Education,” in A.
O. Rorty (ed.),
Philosophers on Education
, London: Routledge,
1998, pp. 51–65.
Stalley, Richard, “Education and the State,” in
Georgios Anagnostopoulos (ed.),
A Companion to Aristotle
,
Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009, pp. 566–76.
11. Law
Brooks, Richard O. and James B. Murphy (eds.),
Aristotle and
Modern Law
, Aldershot Hants, UK and Burlington, VT: Ashgate,
2003.
Burns, Tony, “Aristotle and Natural Law,”
History
of Political Thought
, 19 (1998), 142–66.
Duke, George,
Aristotle and Law: The Politics of Nomos
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gordley, James R., “Tort Law in the Aristotelian
Tradition,” in Salvador Rus Rufino (ed.),
Aristoteles: El
Pensamiento Politico y Juridico
. León & Seville:
University of León & University of Seville, 1999, pp.
71–97.
Hamburger, Max,
Morals and Law: The Growth of Aristotle’s
Legal Theory
, New Haven: Yale University Press, 1951.
Huppes-Cluysenaer, Liesbeth & Nuno M..S. Coelho (eds.),
Aristotle on Emotions in Law and Politics
, Dordrecht:
Springer, 2018.
Miller, Eugene, “Prudence and the Rule of Law,”
American Journal of Jurisprudence
, 24 (1979),
181–206.
Miller, Fred D., Jr., “Aristotle’s Philosophy of Law,”
in Fred D. Miller, Jr. and Carrie-Ann Biondi (eds.),
A History of
the Philosophy of Law from the Ancient Greeks to the Scholastics
[vol. 6 of
A Treatise of Legal Philosophy and General
Jurisprudence
, ed. Enrico Pattaro]. Dordrecht: Springer, 2007,
pp.79–110.
Schroeder, Donald N., “Aristotle on Law,”
Polis
, 4 (1981), 17–31; reprinted in Richard O. Brooks
and James Bernard Murphy (eds.),
Aristotle and Modern Law
,
Aldershot Hants, UK: Ashgate Publishing Co., 2003, pp.
37–51.
Wormuth, F. D., “Aristotle on Law,” in M. R. Korvitz
and A. E. Murphy (eds.),
Essays in Political Theory Presented to
G. H. Sabine,
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1948,
pp. 45–61.
Zanetti, Gianfrancesco, “Problematic Aspects of
Aristotle’s Philosophy of Law,”
Archiv
f
ü
r Rechts- und Sozialphilosophie
, 81
(1995), 49–64.
12. Aristotle and Contemporary Politics
Biondi, Carrie-Ann, “Aristotle on the Mixed Constitution and
Its Relevance for American Political Thought,” in David Keyt and
Fred D. Miller, Jr. (eds.),
Freedom, Reason, and the Polis: Essays
in Ancient Greek Political Philosophy
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2007, 176–98.
Frank, Jill,
A Democracy of Distinction: Aristotle and the
Work of Politics
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
2005.
Galston, William A.,
Justice and the Human Good
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1980.
Garver, Eugene,
Aristotle’s Politics: Living Well and Living
Together
, Chicago: Chicago University Press, 2011.
Goodman, Lenn E. and Robert Talise (eds.),
Aristotle’s
Politics Today
, Albany: State University of New York Press,
2003.
Kraut, Richard, “Aristotle and Rawls on the Common
Good,” in Marguerite Deslauriers and Pierre Destrée
(eds.),
The Cambridge Companion to Aristotle’s Politics
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2013, pp. 350–74.
Lord, Carnes, “Aristotle and the Idea of Liberal
Education,” in Josiah Ober and Charles Hedrick (eds.),
Demokrateia: A Conversation of Democracy, Ancient and Modern
,
Princeton: Princeton University Press Oxford: Blackwell, 1996, pp.
271–88.
Machan, Tibor R., “Aristotle and the Moral Status of
Business,”
Journal of Value Inquiry
, 38 (2004),
217–33.
Mara, Gerald M., “The Culture of Democracy: Aristotle’s
Athênaiôn Politeia
as Political Theory,” in
Aristide Tessitore (ed.),
Aristotle and Modern Politics: The
Persistence of Political Philosophy
, Notre Dame: University of
Notre Dame Press, 2002, 307–41.
Mulgan, Robert G., “Was Aristotle an ‘Aristotelian
Social Democrat’?”
Ethics
, 111 (2000),
79–101.
Murphy, James Bernard,
The Moral Economy of Labor:
Aristotelian Themes in Economic Theory
, New Haven: Yale
University Press, 1993.
Nussbaum, Martha C., “Aristotelian Social Democracy,”
in R. Bruce Douglas, Gerald M. Mara, and Henry S. Richardson (eds.)
Liberalism and the Good
, London: Routledge, 1990, pp.
203–52.
–––, “Capabilities and Human
Rights,”
Fordham Law Review
, 66 (1997), 273–300;
reprinted in Richard O. Brooks and James Bernard Murphy (eds.),
Aristotle and Modern Law
, Aldershot Hants, UK: Ashgate
Publishing Co., 2003, pp. 413–40.
–––, “Aristotle, Politics, and Human
Capabilities: A Response to Anthony, Arneson, Charlesworth, and
Mulgan,”
Ethics
, 111 (2000), 102–40.
Pack, Spencer J., “Aristotle’s Difficult Relationship with
Modern Economic Theory,”
Foundations of Science
, 13
(2008), 256–80.
Rasmussen, Douglas B. and Douglas J. Den Uyl,
Liberty and
Nature: An Aristotelian Defense of Liberal Order
, La Salle, IL:
Open Court, 1991.
–––,
Norms of Liberty: A Perfectionist Basis
for Non-Perfectionist Politics
, University Park, PA: Pennsylvania
State University Press, 2005.
Schollmeier, Paul,
Rewriting Contemporary Political Philosophy
with Plato and Aristotle: An Essay on Eudaimonic
Politics,
London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2019.
Salkever, Stephen S.,
Finding the Mean: Theory and Practice in
Aristotelian Political Philosophy
, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1990.
Tessitore, Aristide (ed.),
Aristotle and Modern Politics: The
Persistence of Political Philosophy
, Notre Dame: University of
Notre Dame Press, 2002.
Wallach, John C., “Contemporary Aristotelianism,”
Political Theory
, 20 (1992), 613–41.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
[Please contact the author with suggestions.]
Related Entries
Aristotle, General Topics: biology
|
Aristotle, General Topics: ethics
|
Aristotle, Special Topics: natural philosophy