Basil [Cardinal] Bessarion
First published Mon Aug 27, 2018; substantive revision Sat Sep 3, 2022
Basil Bessarion (d. 1472) was, before Marsilio Ficino
(1433–1499), the not so grey eminence responsible for the return
of Plato in the Western world. Defending Plato’s reputation from
the attacks of the arch-Aristotelian George of Trebizond—attacks
which were founded in a long anti-Platonic tradition—Bessarion
introduced Christianized readings of Plato’s dialogues,
characterizing him as the pagan philosopher best suited to Roman
theology. Bessarion’s argumentative strategy not only rescued
Plato, but also opened the path to an anti-metaphysical approach to
Aristotelianism, while revealing to the Latin world a wealth of
knowledge from his Greek cultural heritage.
1. Life
2. Works
2.1 Bessarion the Theologian
2.2 Bessarion the Aristotelian
2.3 The
In calumniatorem Platonis
3. Reception
Bibliography
Primary Literature
Secondary Literature
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Life
Bessarion was born in Trebizond between 1399 and 1408, and baptized
Basil. At a young age, he went to Byzantium, where he studied with
John Cortasmenos (d. 1431/7). He changed his name to Bessarion when he
became a monk in 1423. Pursuing his ecclesiastical career, Bessarion
engaged in diplomatic activity in the service of the emperor John VIII
Palaiologos. This put him in contact with the court of the Despot of
Mistra, a city where he had the opportunity to deepen his
philosophical and mathematical training under the guidance of Gemistos
Pletho (d. 1454). The decisive year in the life of Bessarion was
probably 1437, when he was made metropolitan of Nicea (hence the
common epithet of
Cardinal Nicenus
) and left for Italy as
member of the Greek delegation to the Council of Ferrara-Florence.
The Council was mainly devoted to an attempt at unifying the Latin
and Greek Churches, which the Western European powers had made a
condition for providing military support to Palaiologos as he
attempted to fend off the Ottoman Turks. As a member of the Greek
delegation, the young Bessarion was not eager to concede the main
dogmatic point of disagreement between the two churches, which had led
to their separation in the eleventh century: the problem of the place
of the Holy Spirit in the Creed. According to the Greeks the Spirit
proceeded only from the Father, while in the Roman formulation it also
proceeded from the Son (
Filioque
). And yet, driven by his
concern for the unstable political situation in Greece and finally
convinced by the texts of the Church Fathers, Bessarion changed his
mind and in April 1439 pronounced an oration (the
Oratio dogmatica
de unione
), in which he advocated for agreement between Greek and
Latin authors. In July 1439 Bessarion read the act of union between
the Roman and the Greek Church in Florence. The same year, while he
was in Greece for the last time, Bessarion was made Cardinal.
Bessarion would spend the rest of his life as one of the most
important and influential members of the Roman Curia. He was selected
for important diplomatic missions; for example, in 1450 Niccolò
V sent him to Bologna as
legato a latere
. He took particular
care of Greek rites abbeys, like those in Calabria, Messina, and
Grottaferrata. He obtained a number of benefices, and in 1458 he was
selected as protector of the Franciscan Order. In 1463 he also became
Patriarch of Constantinople. He even came close to being elevated to
the papacy at least twice, but apparently his beard—which for
many symbolized his Greek origins—prevented him from garnering
the necessary support. His activities as a cardinal were coupled with
scholarly enterprises, which he undertook personally, and also
sponsored as the patron of a circle of intellectuals who were in many
cases Greek emigrés like him. Men like Theodore Gaza (d. 1476)
and Niccolò Perotti (d. 1480)—and for a short period even
his nemesis-to-be George of Trebizond (d. 1473)—were all part of
the Cardinal’s entourage.
After the fall of Constantinople in 1453, Bessarion’s main
interest was in rescuing the cultural heritage of his homeland,
Greece, and he pursued this goal on both intellectual and political
planes. From an intellectual point of view, Bessarion’s plan
involved salvaging Greek texts which were until then unknown in
Western Christendom and were generally rare (to the extent that in
some cases they survive today only in the exemplars collected by the
Cardinal). An avid lifelong book collector, Bessarion assembled a
library in order to prevent the loss of these treasures:
“without books, the tomb would cover the names of men, just as
it covers their bodies”.  Bessarion feared—indeed he was
consumed with terror—“lest all those wonderful books, the
product of so much toil and study by the greatest human minds, those
very beacons of the earth, should be brought to danger and destruction
in an instant”. Bessarion felt that Venice—a city with
which he had entertained a long relationship and where he served as
papal legate in 1463—could be a safe haven for his library and
the books he donated around 1468 formed the first nucleus of the
Biblioteca Marciana.
In addition to saving books from destruction,
Bessarion had also a more practical political agenda for his homeland;
he was among the most vocal advocates for the call for a new crusade to
free Greece from Ottoman control. He was therefore engaged in
several diplomatic missions, in Germany and then in Vienna, which
aimed to convince Western rulers to fight the Turks. After an attempt
in 1464 failed because of the death of Pope Pius II in Ancona, Bessarion
worked until the end of his days to build support 
for a project that appeared more and more illusory with every passing
year. It was on the way back from one of these diplomatic missions in
1472, this time to France, that Bessarion fell ill and died in
Ravenna. He was interred in his titular Church, SS. Apostoli in Rome,
where Antoniazzo Romano and Melozzo da Forlì had decorated a
chapel in his name between 1464 and 1467.
2. Works
Bessarion’s
opera omnia
include writings prepared for
audiences in both the Byzantine and the Roman courts, such as orations
and pieces of poetry. Of particular interest are the orations he
addressed to Italian rulers, in order to convince them to join a
crusade against the Turks (the
Orationes ad principes Italiae
contra Turcos
, 1470). The
De errore Paschatis
, devoted
to calculating the proper date of Easter, was probably composed with
the assistance of Regiomontanus (1436–1476) and reflects
Bessarion’s early interest in astronomy, which he had cultivated
since the time of his training under Cortasmenos and Pletho. Bessarion
also left behind a rich corpus of letters which he had never edited for
publication. In addition to being the patron of important translations, he
also himself translated Greek works into Latin, including Saint
Basil’s
De nativitate Domini
, Xenophon’s
Memorabilia
, and Demosthenes’
First Olinthiac
.
However, Bessarion’s most important works, both as an
author and as a translator, are focused on theology and
philosophy.
2.1 Bessarion the Theologian
During his years in Greece, Bessarion adopted traditionalist
positions, which included hostility toward the tenets of the Roman
Church and Scholastic theology, which conflicted with the Hesicastic
contemplative doctrines still dominant in Greece at that time. The
experience of the Council of Ferrara-Florence led him to question and
abandon some of his previous convictions. This is evident in the
Refutationes
of two writings, respectively by Maximus
Planudes (13–14
th
c.) and Marcos Eugenikos (d. 1444,
present himself at the Council), in which Bessarion defended the
procession of the Spirit from the Son. In other writings, and
particularly in the
Encyclical letter to the Greeks
, composed
when he became Patriarch of Constantinople, he emphasized the primacy
of the Roman Pontiff, inviting the Greeks to restore the union of the
two Churches which had fallen apart after the Council. In
On the
Eucharist
, which he translated from Greek to Latin and
re-elaborated several times over more than two decades, Bessarion
defended the
epiclesis
in the Orthodox Eucharist.
One of the most interesting theological writings by Bessarion,
nonetheless, was prompted by a quarrel with George of Trebizond, which
along with their disagreements over George’s translations of the
Aristotelian
Problemata
and Ptolemy’s
Almagestus
, ultimately led to the deterioration of their
relationship. When commenting on John 21:22 during a banquet,
Bessarion had observed that the Latin text of the Vulgate Gospel was
corrupted, and rather than reading “sic volo eum manere donec
veniam, quid ad te?”, with reference to John, should have read
“si volo eum manere donec veniam, quid ad te?”. George of
Trebizond opposed the Cardinal, defending the Vulgate. Bessarion
reacted with a short writing, largely based on the philological
teachings of Nicholas Maniacutia (12
th
c.), which affirmed
the necessity of verifying the Latin text of the Gospels against the
original Greek. For Bessarion, rejection of George’s
philological views went hand in hand with a dismissal of his
millenarian beliefs: by defending the version containing
“sic”, George had in fact shown that he accepted the idea
that John was alive and awaiting the second coming of
Christ. George’s millenarianism resurfaced—with wider and
different implications—during the Plato-Aristotle controversy,
which represented the crux of his dispute with Bessarion (see
below).
2.2 Bessarion the Aristotelian
Bessarion’s reputation as a Platonist—mainly associated
with his struggle against the arch-Aristotelian George of
Trebizond—has at times obscured in modern scholarship his
contribution to the Peripatetic tradition. By contrast,
Bessarion’s Aristotelian expertise was widely recognized in the
centuries after his death, when his translation of the
Metaphysics
was celebrated and reprinted several times,
including in Bekker’s
Corpus Aristotelicum
(1831).
Undertaken between 1446 and 1451 and dedicated to King Alfonso I of
Naples, the translation was praised by Nicholas of Cusa for its
excellence, and by Giannozzo Manetti for its clarity, which he
attributed to the Cardinal’s decision to render the text
ad
sensum
, rather than
ad verbum
.
In addition to his
linguistic skills, Bessarion was aided in this enterprise by a deep
knowledge of the Aristotelian works, cultivated since his
Bildungsjahre
, as a number of studies on the contents of his
library have revealed. Bessarion was not only receptive to the
Aristotelian tradition, but also to its recent Latin development, as
represented by Scholasticism. Again, studies of Bessarion’s
library have revealed this only apparently surprising aspect of his
philosophical training: Thomas Aquinas in particular was a well-known
author in Byzantium, mostly because of the Greek translations of the
Summa contra gentiles
and of the
Summa theologiae
made by Demetrios Kydones in the fourteenth century. Bessarion’s
familiarity with these matters also influenced the
In
calumniatorem Platonis
, where one of the Cardinal’s
recurring arguments is that George of Trebizond was essentially
ignorant of the traditions (Aristotelianism and Scholasticism) he
claimed were superior to Platonism (see below).
Bessarion’s reputation as an expert in matters of Aristotelian
and Scholastic philosophy is exemplified by his role as mediator in a
quarrel over the future contingents between two theologians from
Leuven, Henry of Zomeren and Peter de Rivo. From 1469 until his death,
Bessarion played an important role in this controversy not only
because he had once been a patron of de Zomeren himself, but also
because the Cardinal had gathered around him several skilled
Scholastic philosophers, including Francesco della Rovere (soon to be
Pope as Sixtus IV) and Fernando de Cordoba, both of whom took part in
the dispute. This was not the only circumstance in which Bessarion and
members of his entourage took part in Scholastic disputes. For all
these reasons, the case of Bessarion calls into question the simplistic
opposition between Aristotelian Scholasticism and a purely Platonic
Humanism dear to past scholarship, showing instead the blurred lines
between these traditions (see, e.g., Monfasani 2016b). Even the
In
calumniatorem Platonis
, a text consecrated even from its title to
the defense of Plato, was no less the result of this ambiguous
relationship between Humanism and Scholasticism, between Platonism and
Aristotelianism.
2.3 The
In calumniatorem Platonis
George of Trebizond’s resentment towards Bessarion was one of
the driving forces behind the
Comparatio philosophorum Platonis et
Aristotelis
(around 1458), in which George bitterly attacked
Plato, a philosopher for whom the Cardinal’s preference was
notorious. In three books George attacked Plato as ignorant, impious
and vicious, while celebrating the perfect wisdom, piety and virtue of
Aristotle. This kind of work, a comparison of the respective merits of
Plato and Aristotle, especially in religious matters, was not uncommon
in the Byzantine
milieu
, and Gemistus Pletho had composed his
own
comparatio
at the time of the Council of Florence:
Pletho’s booklet, written in Greek and therefore little read,
celebrated the piety of Platonic philosophy in an attempt to expose
the frail Aristotelian foundation of Scholasticism. George’s
comparatio
was by contrast intended to reinforce the role of
Aristotle as authority of reference for Christian theology, to the
extent of making the Stagirite aware of dogmas such as Trinity and
occasionally placing him above even Thomas Aquinas. George’s
comparatio
had an apocalyptic subtext, made explicit in the
final pages of the work, in which the coming of a fourth
Plato—the second and the third were respectively Epicurus and
Mohammed—is connected to the fall of the Byzantine empire, and
characterized as a threat to the Latin West. The unnamed fourth Plato
was possibly either Pletho or Bessarion himself.
George’s
Comparatio
was immediately perceived as
dangerous by Bessarion, who needed to respond to it in order to
preserve his reputation and that of Plato. If Plato was perceived as
impious, so too was the Cardinal by association. With the help of
several members of his circle, Bessarion produced over the course of
about ten years his masterpiece: the
In calumniatorem
Platonis
(Against the Slanderer of Plato).
The preparation of the
work required several adjustments, both formal and theoretical. From a
formal point of view, Bessarion realized that a work written in Greek,
as the
In calumniatorem
initially was, would not have had the
desired impact. He therefore translated the work into Latin, and in
order to make it stylistically appealing engaged a skilled Latinist,
his secretary Niccolò Perotti, to revise the text.
Perotti’s re-elaboration made the work more accessible and
elegant, though he occasionally struggled to do justice to the
philosophical concepts contained within.
From a theoretical point of view, Bessarion was interested in a
different kind of revision. Around 1457, when he was involved in a
debate on nature and art in an epistolary exchange with Theodore Gaza,
Bessarion had initially argued, like his master Pletho, that Plato and
Aristotle were irreconcilably opposed. Yet, the Cardinal changed this
position, after coming across a treatise—now lost—on the
same topic by George of Trebizond: in his own subsequent
booklet—the
De natura et arte
—destined to become
the sixth book of the
In calumniatorem Platonis
, Bessarion
embraced a conciliatory view modeled on the approach of late-antique
commentator Simplicius. This interpretation—which is adopted
throughout the
In calumniatorem
—cast Aristotle as a
natural philosopher, and Plato as a theologian, thus explaining the
apparent disagreement between the two authors as merely a question of
different subject matter and of different levels of reality. This
exegetical move allowed Bessarion to avoid openly attacking Aristotle,
while implicitly maintaining the superiority of Plato, in particular
as an external aid for Christian faith. It also allowed him to avoid
contrasts with Aristotelians in the Roman curia, and to rely on
Scholastic authorities such as Albert the Great and Thomas Aquinas to
meet his interpretative goals.
This arsenal of sources was crucial for exposing George’s scarce
knowledge of Aristotelian philosophy and tradition, and therefore the
unreliability of his praise of the Stagirite’s alleged piety:
this problem is the subject of the third book of the
In
calumniatorem Platonis
, which was composed at a later stage,
mainly relying on material provided by the Dominican theologian
Giovanni Gatti (d.
ante
1484). Finally, by defending the
agreement between Plato and Aristotle, Bessarion could also avoid any
association with Gemistus Pletho, whose ambiguous religious reputation
could have tainted the Cardinal.
The
In calumniatorem
is divided into six books: books one, two
and four mirror the three books of George’s
Comparatio
.
Book one focuses on proving Plato’s wisdom, in spite of the
elusiveness of his style and the dialogical structure of his works,
against George’s claim that he was ignorant. After listing
authors who praised Plato above Aristotle—mainly Cicero and
Augustine, and several Fathers of the Church—Bessarion discusses
the apparent absence of certain subjects in Plato’s works by
invoking the Pythagorean practice of secrecy. Yet, the Cardinal also
demonstrates that Plato was perfectly trained in all the disciplines,
and offered an alternative encyclopedia of wisdom to the Aristotelian
one.
The second book is the closest to the Byzantine tradition of the
comparatio
, and addresses the problem of Plato’s and
Aristotle’s piety. Taking exegeses from authors like Plotinus,
Proclus, the Ps.-Dionysius, Simplicius, and many others, Bessarion
counter-analyzes the different subjects at the center of
George’s invective, suggesting that Plato offered theorizations
of decisive topics such as creation, soul and matter that were more
akin to Christian dogma. Bessarion resolved embarrassing impasses in
Plato’s philosophy, such as the doctrine of matter and the
doctrine of the
metasomatosis
as presented in the
Timaeus
, by employing elaborate distinctions in the first
case, and allegorical explanation in the second, in the process making
them acceptable to Christian readers. Again, Bessarion repeatedly
insists on the only apparent disagreement between Plato and Aristotle:
by recovering another argument from Simplicius, he claims that the
Stagirite attacked the words, and not the meaning of Plato’s
doctrines, so as to preserve them from distortions and
manipulations. Aristotle, Bessarion claims, did the same with
Parmenides and Melissus, who spoke as theologians no less than
Plato.
The third book, as indicated above, reviews a number of problematic
issues in George of Trebizond’s treatment of Aristotle. Lighter
topics—such as those related to sacrifices, and the reliance on
poets and women—give way to more complex issues, such as
Aristotle’s purported knowledge of Trinitarian dogma, his views
on the immortality of the soul, and the place of providence in
Peripatetic cosmology.  Particularly important here are the chapters
centered on the impossibility of the individual immortality of the
soul
in via Aristotelis
, since it contrasts with the eternity
of the world defended in
On the Heavens
. Bessarion,
conversely, finds both Averroes’ and Alexander of
Aphrodisias’ interpretations of the soul acceptable according to
the Aristotelian tenets, despite their contrast with the Christian
faith.
The fourth book deals with the problem of the virtue of Plato. Relying
on Ps.-Dionysius, Bessarion offers a spiritual interpretation of
love—as described in the
Symposium
and in the
Phaedrus
—in radical contrast with the sexual one
postulated by George. In a different section Bessarion employs
Herodotus’s comparative method to justify the common use of
women advocated by Plato in the
Republic
. Additionally,
Bessarion defuses George’s millenarian prophecy about the fourth
Plato by arguing that the fall of the Greek Empire was due to an
unescapable cyclical decline that the adoption of Plato’s
doctrines would have forestalled. In the final chapter of the book,
Bessarion rebukes George for his hypocrisy, since he praised Plato
when he translated the
Parmenides
and the
Laws
.
George’s translation of the
Laws
is the primary target
of the fifth book, which contains a list of the errors—actual
and alleged—made by Trebizond in his edition. The goal of this
chapter is to prove George’s incompetence in Platonic
philosophy, which in turn further proves the unreliability of his
accusations against Plato. Yet, a peculiar concern with the
translation of Platonic works runs throughout the entire
In
calumniatorem
: Bessarion was aware that Latin Europeans’
scarce knowledge of Plato might have inclined them to listen to George
of Trebizond. Bessarion’s practice of offering in his work
translations of Platonic texts, accompanied by alternative exegeses to
those offered by George—was intended to correct this knowledge
gap in the Western world. Bessarion also presented to his Latin
readers Aristotelian authors, such as Alexander of Aphrodisias, who
had until then limited circulation in the Latin world, but whose
interpretations of Aristotle placed the Stagirite in contradiction
with Christian dogma. These insertions were part of Bessarion’s
strategy for exposing the religious limits of Aristotelian philosophy,
so providing implicit support for the notion that Plato could serve as
a better external aid for true faith, in the tradition of the Church
Fathers, and of Greek theologians such as Eusebius of Cesarea and
Theodore Metochites.
The sixth book of the
In calumniatorem
, the above-mentioned
De natura et arte
, is the exegesis of a passage from the
second book of the Aristotelian
Physics
. Written before the
other books composing the
In calumniatorem
, it is the only
one in which Bessarion openly names George as his adversary
and—as stated above—is the first work in which Bessarion
expresses conciliaristic views about Plato and Aristotle. In this
sense the
De natura et arte
represented a sort of
“dress rehearsal” for the
magnum opus
applied to
a single exegetical problem, which had nonetheless significant
implications for crucial subjects (such as the doctrine of Ideas and
divine causality in the world).
3. Reception
While George’s
Comparatio
appeared in print only
posthumously in 1523 in a single defective edition, Bessarion took
full advantage of the newly discovered technology of the printing
press to reach his audience: it offered Bessarion another advantage
over his opponent by ensuring wider circulation of the finished
text. The
In calumniatorem Platonis
was printed in 1469 by
Schweynheym and Pannartz. In the very the same year they also
published Alcinous’s
Didaskalikon
, and Apuleius’s
De deo Socratis
and
De Platone et eius dogmate
,
probably as part of a filo-Platonic editorial project orchestrated by
the Cardinal. The
In calumniatorem
was subsequently reprinted
twice, by the Aldine printing press, in 1503 and 1516. Both editions,
which are not identical, included Bessarion’s own revisions to
the 1469 version of the text.
Bessarion’s moderate Christianized reading of Plato provided
authors like Marsilio Ficino and Francesco Cattani da Diacceto with
powerful exegetical schemes, such as those taken from Plotinus,
Proclus, and the Ps.-Dionysius (whose authenticity Bessarion defended
even against members of his own circle). In the case of Ficino, these
interpretive keys were magnified in an even more ambitious
Christianization of Plato, in which the ancient philosopher was
compared to Moses. A monumental work which included several lists of
quotations and authorities, the
In calumniatorem
quickly
became a repertory of material for sixteenth-century writers and
philosophers. Sections like those on the Pythagorean secrets (I.2)
enjoyed the attention of numerous readers, as did the letter of Lysis
to Hipparchus. Louis le Roy (d. 1577) relied heavily on the second
book of the
In calumniatorem
for his commentary to the
Timaeus
. Without citing his source, Symphorien Champier
(d. 1540) recovered passages from the
In calumniatorem
in
many of his works. Champier wanted to convince his friend Jacques
Lefèvre d’Étaples (d. 1536) of Plato’s
utility for Christian religion and the
In calumniatorem
offered a wealth of material to support his efforts. Though he admired
Bessarion’s translation of the
Metaphysics
, which he
was the first to publish, Lefèvre
d’Étaples—along with Guillaume
Budé—nonetheless favored the position of George of
Trebizond.
The composite nature of the
In calumniatorem
allowed for
divergent interpretations of the nature of Bessarion’s work. In
the
In calumniatorem
Bessarion himself oscillated between
describing the text as an apology of Plato and as a comparison between
Plato and Aristotle. Despite the fact that the
In
calumniatorem
helped to disseminate the genre the
comparatio
Platonis et Aristotelis
in the early modern period, the work was
mostly perceived as an apology of Plato, and this made Bessarion an
obvious target at the time of the anti-Platonic reaction led by the
Jesuits at the end of the sixteenth century. Members of other orders,
like the Franciscans and Augustinians, were nonetheless more
sympathetic to the Cardinal, praising him and the
In
calumniatorem
well into the seventeenth century. Bessarion also
made an impact within the walls of the universities.  His emphasis on
Aristotle as a mere natural philosopher, in fact, provided Peripatetic
professors with valid arguments against metaphysical interpretations
of the Philosopher: for example, both Pietro Pomponazzi
(1462–1525) and Francesco Vimercato (d. 1569), though arguing in
favor of the mortality of the soul from different perspectives, were
in debt to passages from the third book of the
In calumniatorem
Platonis
.
Bibliography
Primary Literature
The
In calumniatorem Platonis
was originally printed in 1469
in Rome (by Schweynheym and Pannartz), and then again in 1503 and 1516
in Venice (by Manutius). Both Venetian editions—which slightly differ
from one another—contain revisions suggested by Bessarion
himself. Ludwig Mohler’s modern edition is based on the text printed by Manutius. See
Bessarionis In Calumniatorem Platonis Libri IV
,
Paderborn: Schöningh, 1927;
Aus Bessarions Gelehrtenkreis: Abhandlungen, Reden,
Briefe
, Paderborn: Schöningh, 1942, pp. 92–146 (book
VI),
respectively the second and the third volume of his
Kardinal Bessarion als Theologe, Humanist und Staatsmann
.
Mohler printed the Greek original text as well, but completely omitted
the fifth book of the work. A large selection of the
In
calumniatorem
has been translated into Italian, on the basis of
Manutius 1516 edition, but taking into consideration other
emendations as well:
Contro il calunniatore di Platone
, Eva Del Soldato (ed.),
with a bibliographical note by Ivanoe Privitera, Rome: Edizioni di
Storia e Letteratura, 2014.
The sixth book of the
In calumniatorem
has been recently
edited and translated into German:
Über Natur und Kunst
, Sergei Mariev, Monica
Marchetto, and Katharina Luchner (eds.), Hamburg: Felix Meiner,
2015.
There also exists an Italian translation:
La natura delibera—La natura e l’arte
, Pier
Davide Accendere and Ivanoe Privitera (eds.), Milan: Bompiani,
2015.
Giovanni Gatti’s
Notata
, which represents the basis
for the third book of the
In calumniatorem
, has been published in a critical edition : Giovanni Gatti,
Notata ex libro ineptiis et deliramentis pleno, qui inscribitur De Comparatione Philosophorum
, John Monfasani (ed.), Turnhout: Brepols, 2021.
Bessarion’s theological works have been printed in the
Patrologia Greca
161 (Paris 1866). The
Oratio dogmatica
de unione
has been re-edited several times since:
Bessarion Nicaenus, S.R.E. Cardinalis: Oratio dogmatica de
unione
, Emmanuel Candal (ed.), Rome: Pontificium institutum
orientalium studiorum, 1958;
Orazione dogmatica sull’unione dei Greci e dei Latini
,
Gianfrancesco Lusini (ed.), Naples: Vivarium, 2013.
Other works by Bessarion, including many of his letters, have been
edited by Mohler in
Aus Bessarions Gelehrtenkreis: Abhandlungen,
Reden, Briefe
.
Secondary Literature
Bardi, Alberto, 2018, “Bessarione a lezione di astronomia da
Cortasmeno”,
Byzantinische Zeitschrift
, 111(1):
1–38. doi: 10.1515/bz-2018-0001
Baudry, Léon, 1950 [1989],
Querelle des futurs
contingents
, Paris: Vrin. Translated as
The Quarrel over
Future Contingents (Louvain 1465–1475)
, (Synthese
Historical Library, 36), Rita Guerlac (trans.), Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic, 1989.
Bianca, Concetta, 1999,
Da Bisanzio a Roma. Studi sul
cardinale Bessarione
, Roma: Roma nel Rinascimento.
Bisaha, Nancy, 2004,
Creating East and West: Renaissance
Humanists and the Ottoman Turks
, Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Cattaneo, Gianmario, 2015, “Note critiche
all’epistolario greco del cardinal Bessarione”,
Medioevo Greco. Rivista di Storia e Filologia Bizantina
,
15(1): 51–61.
–––, 2017, “Or. Chald. 88 des Places, il
carteggio tra il cardinal Bessarione e Giorgio Gemisto Pletone e la
philosophia perennis
”,
Studi Italiani di Filologia
Classica
, 14: 241–251.
–––, 2020,
Domizio Calderini, Niccolò
Perotti e la controversia platonico-aristotelica nel
Quattrocento
, Berlin–New York: De Gruyter.
Charlet, Jean-Louis, 1987, “Traductions en vers latins de
fragments grecs dans l’
Epitome
de N. Perotti et
l’
In calumniatorem Platonis
de Bessarion”,
Res Publica Litterarum
, 10: 51–67.
Coluccia, Giuseppe L., 2009,
Basilio Bessarione. Lo spirito
greco e l’occidente
, Firenze: Olschki.
Davies, Martin, 2013, “Some Bessarion Owners”,
La
Bibliofilía
, 115(1): 41–52.
De Keyser, Jeroen, 2011, “Perotti and Friends. Generating
Rave Reviews for Bessarion’s
In calumniatorem
Platonis
”,
Italia Medioevale e Umanistica
, 52:
103–137.
Del Soldato, Eva, 2009 “Platone, Aristotele e il cardinale:
il
De natura et arte
di Bessarione”,
Rinascimento
(Series 2), 48: 61–79.
–––, 2011, “Sulle tracce di Bessarione: la
fortuna cinquecentesca dell’
In calumniatorem
Platonis
”,
Rinascimento
, series 2, 50: 321–342.
–––, 2012, “
Illa Litteris Graecis
Abdita
: Bessarion, Plato and the Western World”, in Marco
Sgarbi (ed.),
Translatio Studiorum: Ancient, Medieval, and Modern
Bearers of Intellectual History
, Leiden: Brill, pp.
107–122. doi:10.1163/9789004236813_009
–––, 2017, “Exploiting Thomas: Renaissance
Thinkers, Aquinas, and the Piety of Aristotle”,
Divus
Thomas
, 120: 89–105.
–––, 2020,
Early Modern Aristotle: On the Making and Unmaking of Authority
, Philadelphia: University of Philadelphia Press.
Eleuteri, Paolo, 1994, “Una parafrasi di Bessarione alla
Fisica
di Aristotele”, in
Θησαυρίσματα
,
24: 189–202.
Feld, M.D., 1982, “Sweynheim and Pannartz, Cardinal
Bessarion, Neoplatonism: Renaissance Humanism and Two Early Printers’
Choice of Texts”,
Harvard Library Bulletin
, 30:
282–335.
Fiaccadori, Gianfranco (ed.), 1994,
Bessarione e
l’Umanesimo
, Naples: Vivarium.
Fyrigos, Antonis, 2011, “Il cardinale Bessarione
‘traduttore’ della
Summa contra gentiles
di
Tommaso d’Aquino”, in
Rivista di studi bizantini e
neoellenici
, 48: 137–266.
Garin, Eugenio, 1976,
Rinascite e rivoluzioni: Movimenti
culturali dal XIV al XVIII secolo
, Bari: Laterza.
Gutkowski, Andrzej and Emanuela Prinzivalli (eds.), 2012,
Bessarione e la sua Accademia
, Rome: Miscellanea
francescana.
Hankins, James, 1991,
Plato in the Italian Renaissance
, 2
vols., (Columbia studies in the classical tradition, 17), Leiden:
Brill.
Hladký, Vojtěch, 2014
The Philosophy of Gemistos
Plethon: Platonism in Late Byzantium, between Hellenism and
Orthodoxy
, Farnham-Burlington: Ashgate.
Karamanolis, George, 2002, “Plethon and Scholarios on
Aristotle”, in Katerina Ierodiakonou (ed.),
Byzantine
Philosophy and its Ancient Sources
, Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp.
253–282.
–––, 2011, “Basil Bessarion”, in
Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy
, H. Lagerlund (ed.),
London: Springer, pp. 145–147.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-9729-4_77
Kraye, Jill and Martin Davies, 2011, “Cardinal Bessarion and
Ludovico Saccano”, in Philippa Jackson and Guido Rebecchini
(eds.),
Mantova e il Rinascimento Italiano: Studi in onore di
David S. Chambers
, Mantua: Sometti, pp. 225–238.
Labowsky, Lotte, 1967, “Bessarione”, in
Dizionario
biografico degli Italiani
, Rome: Istituto dell’Enciclopedia
Italiana, 9: 686–696.
 [
Labowsky 1967 available online
]
–––, 1979,
Bessarion’s Library and the
Biblioteca Marciana: Six Early Inventories
, Rome: Edizioni di
Storia e Letteratura.
Lamers, Hans, 2015,
Greece Reinvented: Transformations of
Byzantine Hellenism in Renaissance Italy
, Leiden: Brill.
doi:10.1163/9789004303799
Maier, Anneliese, 1982,
On the Threshold of Exact Science:
Selected Writings of Anneliese Maier on Late Medieval Natural
Philosophy
, Steven D. Sargent (ed. and trans.), Philadelphia:
University of Pennsylvania Press.
Malpangotto, Manuela and Ephtymios Nicolaidis (eds.), 2021,
Fécondité des échanges
culturels. L’exemple de Bessarion
,
Archives
Internationales d'Histoire des Sciences
(special issue), 71.
Mariev, Sergei, 2016, “Bessarion, Cardinal”, in
Encyclopedia of Renaissance Philosophy
, Marco Sgarbi (ed.),
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 1–10.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-02848-4_25-1
–––, 2017,
Neoplatonic Philosophy in
Byzantium
, in Sergei Mariev (ed.),
Byzantine Perspectives on
Neoplatonism
, Berlin: De Gruyter, pp. 1–30.
––– (ed.), 2020,
Bessarion’s Treasure:
Editing, Translating and Interpreting Bessarion’s Literary
Heritage
, Berlin-New York: De Gruyter.
Martin, Craig, 2014,
Subverting Aristotle. Religion, History,
and Philosophy in Early Modern Science
, Baltimore: Johns Hopkins
University Press.
Märtl, Claudia, Christian Kaiser, and Thomas Ricklin (eds.),
2013,
»Inter graecos latinissimus, inter latinos
graecissimus«. Bessarion zwischen den Kulteren
, Berlin-New
York: De Gruyter.
Meserve, Margaret, 2003, “Patronage and Propaganda at the
First Paris Press: Guillaume Fichet and the First Edition of
Bessarion’s
Orations against the Turks
”,
The Papers
of the Bibliographical Society of America
, 97(4): 521–588.
doi:10.1086/pbsa.97.4.24295683
Mioni, Elpidio, 1960, “Contributo del cardinale Bessarione
all’interpretazione della
Metafisica
aristotelica”, in
Aristotelismo padovano e filosofia aristotelica. Atti del XII
Congresso Internazionale di filosofia
, Florence: Sansoni, pp.
173–181.
Mohler, Ludwig, 1923,
Kardinal Bessarion als Theologe,
Humanist und Staatsmann, I. Darstellung
, Paderborn:
Schöningh.
Monfasani, John, 1976,
George of Trebizond: A Biography and a
Study of His Rhetoric and Logic
, Leiden: Brill.
–––, 1984,
Collectanea Trapezuntiana.
Texts, Documents, and Bibliographies of George of Trebizond
,
Binghamton, NY: Medieval & Renaissance Texts & Studies.
–––, 1992,
Fernando of Cordova: A
Biographical and Intellectual Profile
, Philadelphia: American
Philosophical Society.
–––, 1995,
Byzantine Scholars in Renaissance
Italy: Cardinal Bessarion and Other Émigré’s:
Selected Essays
, Aldershot: Ashgate.
–––, 2004,
Greeks and Latins in Renaissance Italy: Studies on Humanism and Philosophy in the 15th Century,
, Aldershot: Ashgate.
–––, 2012,
Bessarion Scholasticus: A Study
of Cardinal Bessarion’s Latin Library
, Turnhout:
Brepols.
–––, 2015, “Cardinal Bessarion”,
(Oxford Bibliographies), Oxford: Oxford University Press,
doi:10.1093/obo/9780195399301-0230
–––, 2016a,
Greek Scholars Between East and
West in the Fifteenth Century
, Farnham, Surrey: Ashgate.
–––, 2016b, “The Humanist and the
Scholastic: Giovanni Bussi and Henricus de Zomeren”,
Humanistica Lovaniensia
, 65: 29–38.
Pagani, Fabio, 2022, “Greek Identity and Ideas of Decline in Fifteenth-Century Byzantium: Gemistos Pletho and Bessarion”, in Nathanael Aschenbrenner and Jake Ransohoff (eds.),
The Invention of Byzantium in Early Modern Europe
, Washington, D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks, pp. 27–46.
Pontani, Anna, 1989, “Note sulla controversia
platonico-aristotelica del Quattrocento”, in Giuseppe Spadaro
(ed.),
Contributi di filologia greca medievale e moderna
,
Catania: Facoltà di Lettere e Filosofia, pp. 97–165.
Rigo, Antonio, 1991, “Bessarione, Giovanni Regiomontano e i
loro studi su Tolomeo a Venezia e Roma (1462–1464)”,
Studi Veneziani
, 21: 49–110
–––, 1999, “La refutazione di Bessarione
delle
Antepigraphai
di Gregorio Palamas”, in Mariarosa
Cortesi (ed.),
Tradizioni patristiche nell’Umanesimo
,
Florence: Edizioni del Galluzzo, pp. 283–294.
–––, 2001, “Bessarione tra Costantinopoli
e Roma”, in Gianfrancesco Lusini (ed.),
Bessarione di Nicea:
Orazione dogmatica sull’unione dei greci e dei latini
,
Naples: Vivarium, pp. 19–124.
Rigo, Antonio and Niccolò Zorzi, 2021,
I libri di
Bessarione: Studi sui manoscritti del Cardinale a Venezia e in
Europa
, Turnhout: Brepols.
Ronchey, Silvia, 2002, “L’ultimo bizantino. Bessarione
e gli ultimi regnanti di Bisanzio”, in Gino Benzoni (ed.),
L’eredità greca e l’ellenismo veneziano
,
Florence: Olschki, pp. 75–92.
 [
Ronchey 2002 available online
]
Searby, Denis (ed.), 2017,
Never the Twain Shall Meet? Latins
and Greeks learning from each other in Byzantium
, Berlin: De
Gruyter.
Shank, Michael H., 2007, “Regiomontanus as a Physical
Astronomer: Samplings from
The Defence of Theon against George of
Trebizond
”,
Journal for the History of Astronomy
,
38(3): 325–349.
Stormon, E.J., 1981, “Bessarion Before the Council of
Florence: A Survey of His Early Writings (1423–1437)”, in
Elizabeth and Michael Jeffreys and Ann Moffatt (eds.),
Byzantine
Papers: Proceedings of the First Australian Byzantine Studies
Conference Canberra, 17–19 May 1978
, Canberra: Humanities
Research Center, pp. 128–156.
Strobl, Wolfgang, 2000, “Ein griechischer Brief eines
Veroneser Humanisten anläßlich Bessarions Schrift ‘In
calumniatorem Platonis’”,
Jahrbuch der
Oesterreichischen Byzantinistik
, 50: 217–230.
Swerdlow, Noel, 1993, “Science and Humanism in the
Renaissance: Regiomontanus’s Oration on the Dignity and Utility
of the Mathematical Sciences”, in Paul Horwich (ed.),
World
Changes. Thomas Kuhn and the Nature of Science
, Boston: MIT
Press: pp. 131–168.
Vast, Henri, 1878,
Le Cardinal Bessarion (1403–1472).
Étude sur la Chrétienté et la Renaissance vers le
milieu du XVe siècle
, Paris: Hachette.
Zambelli, Paola, 1991, “La metafora é conosciuta solo
da chi fa la metafora. Pomponazzi, Bessarione e Platone”,
Nouvelles de la Republique des Lettres
, 2: 75–88.
Zorzi, Marino, 2002,
Bessarione e i codici greci
,
Florence: Olschki.
Zorzi, Niccolò, 2015, “Per la tradizione manoscritta
dell’inedito commento all’
Etica nicomachea
di Giorgio
Pachimere: I. Il Marc. gr. 212 di Bessarione e i suoi apografi. II.
Ermolao Barbaro e il commento di Pachimere (con una
proekdosis
del cap. 18)”,
Νέα
Ῥώμη. Rivista di ricerche bizantinistiche
, 12:
245–304.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Bessarion’s Book in Defence of Plato: Among the Papers
of the Last Byzantine Philosopher (Il libro di Bessarione in difesa di
Platone: nell’officina dell’ultimo filosofo bizantino)
(PDF),
Catalogue of an Exhibition of the Manuscripts of Bessarion’s
In
Calumniatorem Platonis
in the Biblioteca Marciana, Venice: Venice
University Press.
Related Entries
Aristotelianism: in the Renaissance
|
Byzantine Philosophy
|
Ficino, Marsilio
|
future contingents: medieval theories of
|
Lefèvre d’Étaples, Jacques
|
natural philosophy: in the Renaissance
|
Neoplatonism
|
Plato
|
Pomponazzi, Pietro
|
Proclus
|
Theophrastus