Bernardino Telesio
First published Mon Aug 30, 2004; substantive revision Wed Jan 4, 2023
Bernardino Telesio (1509–1588) belongs to a group of independent
philosophers of the late Renaissance who left the universities in
order to develop philosophical and scientific ideas beyond the
restrictions of the Aristotelian-scholastic tradition. Authors in the
early modern period referred to these philosophers as
‘novateurs’ and ‘modern’. In contrast to his
successors Patrizi and Campanella, Telesio was a fervent critic of
metaphysics and insisted on a purely empiricist approach in natural
philosophy—he thus became a forerunner of early modern
empiricism. He had a remarkable influence on Tommaso Campanella,
Giordano Bruno, Pierre Gassendi, Francis Bacon, Thomas Hobbes and on
freethinkers like Guillaume Lamy and Giulio Cesare Vanini.
1. Life, Works and Influence
2. Cosmology
3. Psychology
4. Theory of sense perception
5. Theory of knowledge
6. Ethics
7. Science and Religion
Bibliography
Works by Telesio
Summaries and contemporary works on Telesio
Secondary literature
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Life, Works and Influence
Bernardino Telesio was born at Cosenza in Calabria in 1509 as the son
of a noble and quite wealthy family. Having been educated by his uncle
Antonio Telesio, a humanist of note, he studied in Milan, Rome and the
famous university of Padua, which he left in 1535. There is no
evidence that Telesio gained a doctorate. Instead of undertaking a
university career, he spent several years in a Benedictine monastery
(1535–44) without taking oaths. Later he lived in the Neapolitan
home of Alfonso III Carafa, Duke of Nocera. In 1553 he married and
settled in Cosenza, becoming the dominant figure of the Accademia
Cosentina, which came to focus on natural philosophy under his
tutelage. Telesio never held a salaried position. After the death of
his wife in 1561, which marked the beginning of his financial
difficulties, he seems to have spent some time in Rome under the
patronage of Pope Pius IV. He rejected the Archbishopric of Cosenza
offered by Pius IV in 1565, leaving this position to his brother. From
1576 on he was moving between Cosenza and Naples; in Naples he lived
with the son and heir of Alfonso Carafa, Ferrante, to whom he
dedicated the final version of his
De rerum natura
. He died
in his hometown in 1588.
Telesio dedicated his whole life to establishing a new kind of natural
philosophy, which can be described as an early defense of naturalism
and empiricism bound together with a rigorous criticism of
Aristotelian natural philosophy and Galenic physiology. Telesio blamed
both Aristotle and Galen for relying on elaborate reasoning rather
than sense perception and empirical research. His fervent attacks
against the greatest authorities of the Western philosophical and
medical traditions led Francis Bacon to speak of him as “the
first of the moderns” (
Opera omnia
vol. III, 1963, p.
114). He was perhaps the most strident critic of metaphysics in late
Renaissance times. It was obviously due to his excellent relationships
with popes and clerics that he was not persecuted and was able during
his own lifetime to publish his rather heterodox writings, which went
on the index shortly after his death. His principal work is the
aforementioned
De rerum natura iuxta propria principia
(“On the Nature of Things according to their Own
Principles”), which in the last augmented edition of the
author’s hand appeared in Naples in 1586. The
De rerum natura
is a huge treatise in nine books which deals with cosmology, biology,
sense perception, reason and ethics. Another treatise of major
importance is
Quod animal universum ab unica animae substantia
gubernatur. Contra Galenum
, in which Telesio critizised central
conceptions of Galenic physiology and psychology. This work was never
printed, but circulated in manuscript copies (De Franco, 1981, p.
XXII). Smaller treatises deal with a variety of themes such as
colours, dreams, geology and meteorology, some of which were published
in Rome in 1565 (
De iis quae in aere fiunt et de
terremotibus
;
De colorum generatione
;
De mari
).
Telesio’s philosophy was disseminated by friends and students such as
Tommaso Campanella,  whose writings contain long paraphrases of
Telesian ideas; by Sertorio Quattromani, Telesio’s successor as head
of the Accademia Cosentina, who published a synthesis of his
predecessor’s philosophy in 1589; and by Antonio Persio, who gave
lessons on Telesio’s thought in Venice and published a collection of
smaller works, the
Varii de naturalibus rebus libelli
, in
1590. Giordano Bruno speaks of the “giudiciosissimo
Telesio” in the third dialog of
De la causa
, whilst
Francis Bacon based his own speculative philosophy of nature on a
blend of Telesian and Paracelsian conceptions (Giachetti Assenza 1980;
Rees 1977; 1984). Thomas Hobbes followed Telesio in the rejection of
species (Schuhmann 1990; Leijenhorst 1998, p. 116ff.) The physiology
of René Descartes in
De homine
shows close
similarities to Telesio’s physiological theories as they are presented
in
De natura rerum
(Hatfield 1992). Telesio also had some
influence on Gassendi and on libertine thinkers (Bianchi 1992).
2. Cosmology
Telesio’s vision of the genesis of nature is simple to the point of
being archaic, yet at the same time astonishingly modern in the sense
that he seems to have been one of the very first defenders of a theory
of natural evolution without metaphysical or theological
presuppositions. According to his
De rerum natura
, the only
things which must be presupposed are passive matter and active force,
the latter of which Telesio thought of as twofold, heat and cold.
These principles were meant to replace the Aristotelian metaphysical
principles of matter and form. In order to explain how all natural
beings came into existence by  these opposing forces, Telesio
presumed that in the beginning God had created two primary globes, the
sun and the earth, the sun being the seat of heat, the earth that of
coldness, and that He had separated them with such a distance in space
that they could not extinguish each other (DRN book I, ch. IV). All
natural things result from the battle of these antagonistic forces for
the possession of matter. The main region of that creative battle is
the surface of the earth, where they create metals, stones and animate
beings. The primary activity of warmth is to move fast and to dilate
and rarefy matter, whereas that of cold is to hinder movement and to
condense matter. Things differ according to the amount of heat or cold
they possess (and therefore according to their density and derivative
qualities such as velocity and colour). The quantity of matter is not
changed through the action of these forces upon it. The role of heat,
cold and matter as ‘natural principles’ had been
highlighted before by Girolamo Fracastoro in the first version of the
Homocentrica
and in the dialogue
Fracastorius sive De
anima
(Lerner 1992), as well as by Girolamo Cardano in his
Liber unicus de natura.
Telesio’s cosmology puts an end to metaphysical explanations. Telesio
thought space to be absolute (DRN book I, ch. XXV–XXVIII), thus
abolishing the Aristotelian notion of a bipartite cosmos divided into
a sublunary world, in which generation and corruption take place, and
a supralunary sphere with eternal regular movements. The existence of
vacuum within space is admitted, but things are said to have a natural
inclination to avoid empty space. In the cosmological chapters of book
IV Telesio critizised the Aristotelian explanation of the movement of
the cosmos by a transcendent telos, the God of Aristotle’s
metaphysics: the sky doesn’t move because of a desire for a being more
perfect than itself, but because it is its own nature to move and thus
to sustain its own life (DRN book IV, ch. XXIV; Aristotle,
Metaph
. XII, ch. 6–7). Likewise, he rejected the idea
that the motions of the subordinate spheres were caused by unmoved
movers, the pure intelligences of the Aristotelian and Christian
traditions, an assumption which he reprimanded to be obscure and
incomprehensible even via imagination (Bondì 1018).
The things of nature are not created, governed and sustained by divine
providence. In Telesio’s philosophy, there is no such thing as a
transcendent mind or idea. All things act solely according to their
own nature, starting from the primary forces of cold and heat. The
Epicurean chance is enclosed in Telesio’s Stoic-influenced philosophy
of nature (Kessler 1992): everything can produce everything, an idea
which was soon to be sharply rejected by Francesco Patrizi da Chierso,
one of the most important contemporary readers of Telesio
(“Obiectiones”, in the appendix of Telesio’s
Varii
libelli
, p. 467 f.). In order to sustain themselves, these
primary forces and all beings which arise through their antagonistic
interaction must be able to sense themselves as well as the opposite
force, that is, they must sense what is convenient and what is
inconvenient or damaging for their survival and well-being. Sensation,
therefore, is not the property of embodied souls. Telesio’s philosophy
can thus be described as a pansensism in the sense that all beings,
animate or inanimate, are said to have the power of sensation.
3. Psychology
With regard to psychology, Telesio took a materialist standpoint.
According to his general rejection of the metaphysical (and therefore
inappropriate) principles of matter and form, he rejected Aristotle’s
definition of the soul as
forma corporis
, i.e. as form and
entelechy of an organic body (Aristotle,
De anima
II,1).
According to Telesio, the soul is a separate being, but not in the
sense of the Platonists, who define it as an immortal essence acting
as the governor and mover of the body during its embodied life.
Telesio held the soul to be a specific part of the body, defining it
as the
spiritus
coursing through the nervous system and
having its main seat in the brain. The
spiritus
which
overtakes the role of the
anima
of the philosophical
tradition is produced by the white ‘semen’. Telesio calls
it the
spiritus e semine eductus
. He maintains in DRN book V,
ch. I:
“This [separate substance] will therefore be the
spiritus
, which took its origin from the semen, as we will
explain elsewhere (and it is to be found in all things made from
semen, namely those which are white and bloodless, with the exception
of the bones and similar things); and only the spirit is what
perceives in the animal, and moves sometimes with the whole body,
sometimes with single parts thereof, and solely governs the whole
animal. That is to say, it performs those actions which, according to
the concurring opinion of all, are typical of the soul.” (Vol.
II, p. 208).
To ascribe psychic functions to a specific part of the body implies a
rejection of the difference between organic and inorganic life, which
dichotomy was central to the Aristotelian, Platonic and Christian
traditions. According to Telesio, there is a quantitative and not a
qualitative difference here, which consists in the higher degree of
complexity and the higher degree of warmth that some physical bodies
possess. Whereas metals or stones are homogenous bodies, organic
bodies consist of heterogeneous parts, including the bodily (though
invisible) spirit in the nerves and brain (DRN book V, ch. II). And
just as there is no metaphysical difference between living and
non-living bodies, there also does not exist a qualitative difference
between animals and humans—in both, it is the same spirit which
coordinates the functions and operations of the different bodily
parts. In DRN book V, ch. III Telesio states:
…and when it has been proved that in animals the spirit
produced from the semen is the substance of their soul, then one
cannot doubt that the same exists in humans, albeit in a much more
noble form, and it is surely not of a very different nature and does
not possess highly different capabilities. We see that humans are
formed by the same things as the other animals, and that they possess
the same abilities and even the same organs for feeding and
reproduction, and that they produce a very similar semen and eject it
in the same way and with the same pleasure and from a very similar
part and become tired after ejaculation, and that the same things are
being formed out of the semen in both cases, namely the same nervous
and membranous systems. And it is only [the spirit] which in all
animate beings is perceiving and moving in the same way and according
to the same dispositions. (Vol II, p. 216).
In order to explain how animate beings perform different functions and
operations, traditional psychological as well as physiological
theories referred to a threefold soul. Whereas Aristotle in
De
anima
had distinguished between the
anima vegetativa
,
anima sensitiva
and
anima cogitativa
(which
distinction also corresponds to that of plants, animals and humans
with their specific faculties), Plato had established three parts of
the soul (
Republic
434d-443e), which in the
Timaios
(69aff.) he had associated with different organs, namely the rational
part of the soul (
logistikon
) to the brain, the spirited
(
thumoeides
) to the heart and the desirous or lower passions
(
épithumêtikon
) to the liver. In this
tripartition he was followed by the Stoic physician Galen (
De
placitis Hippocratis et Platonis
VII, I and III), who added a
threefold spirit—the
spiritus naturalis
being produced
in the liver, the
spiritus vitalis
refined in the blood and
the
spiritus animalis
distilled in the brain. Whereas the
Aristotelian psychology was combatted in the
De rerum natura
,
Telesio dedicated a whole treatise to the criticism of Galen, the
Quod animal universum ab unica animae substantia gubernatur.
Contra Galenum
. According to Telesio, the functioning of an
organic body cannot be explained by presupposing a plurality of
rulers. In asserting the unity of the soul (i.e. spirit), Telesio
followed the medical theorist Giovanni Argenterio (1513–1572),
who defended the unity of the spirit against the Aristotelian and
medical traditions.
Telesio combined the medical theory of spirit with a basically Stoic
notion, that of the
hegemonikon
, according to which the
spirit in the brain is responsible for all the states and operations
traditionally ascribed to the tripartite soul: “the animal
… is governed by one substance residing in the brain”
(
Quod animal universum
ch. XXV; Var. lib. p. 254). Whereas in
Quod animal universum
he went on to explain the affects in
terms of physiology, in
De rerum natura
he added a theory of
sense perception and a theory of knowledge on physical grounds.
4. Theory of sense perception
Telesio rejected the traditional concept of sense organs, replacing it
with a mechanistic explanation of sense perception (DRN books
V–VII). In his opinion, to speak of sense organs is
inappropriate, as the so-called sense organs are nothing else than
“parts of the body which are either more subtle or soft than
others, or perforated and open. One should not believe in the
slightest that they are made thus in order to offer some capacity or
support of perceiving to the sensitive soul (which seems to be the
duty of organs), but in order to provide an easy and open entry to the
forces of external things and to those things themselves.” (DRN
book I, ch.VI; vol. I, p. 68). What is perceived are not the forms or
species
of things as the Aristotelians believed, but impulses
of light and air (DRN book V, ch. VIII; vol. II, 254; for the
rejection of
species
see DRN book VII, ch. XXX–XXXIII
against the Aristotelian and ch. XVIII–XXIX against the Galenic
theory; Telesio’s rejection of
species
was taken up by
Hobbes,
Leviathan
book I, ch. I “De sensu”). As
the sense of touch provides the most narrow contact between outer
object and sensing spirit, it assumes the role of the primary sense,
which was traditionally identified with the sense of vision (DRN book
VII, ch. IX, vol. III, p. 34.) The
informatio
theory being
rejected, Telesio comes close to a neuronal explanation of sense
perception, which is a mechanical process arising from the transfer of
tactile impressions through the nerves to the brain. It is the spirit
residing in the brain which experiences nervous dilatations and
contractions, and which judges these sensations according to the basic
scheme of pleasure and pain, giving out corresponding reactions like
moving towards something or avoiding contact (DRN book VII ch.
II–V). Strictly speaking, sense perception is a sensation of
sensing (
sensus sensus
) which takes place in the brain:
“Sense perception can only be the perception of the activities
of things and impulses in the air, and can only consist of the
perception of [the spirit’s] own passions, transformations and
movements, particularly the latter. Indeed, the spirit perceives them
because he perceives that it is affected by them, that it is being
changed and moved.” (Vol. III, p. 6)
In his explanation of sense perception Telesio comes close to the
Democritan theory which he combines with the basic Stoic notion of
conservatio sui
, a key term in Telesio’s philosophy. Pleasure
is identified with the sensation of self-preservation, pain is the
sensation of destruction (DRN book VII, ch. III; vol. III, p. 10). In
this, as well as in his theory of knowledge, Telesio seems to follow
Girolamo Fracastoro’s explanation of sense perception and
understanding given in the closing chapters of
De sympathia et
antipathia rerum
and in the epistemological treatise
Turrius
sive de intellectione
.
5. Theory of knowledge
For Telesio, the
conservatio sui
is the foundation from which
all sensitive and cognitive functions arise. Defending an empirical
approach in epistemology, Telesio tried to annul the traditional
distinction between sense perception and reason, and he denied that
there exists something like a purely mental sphere and a corresponding
intellect which Aristotle in
De anima
III had called
nous
. Understanding is a process which requires sense
perception and memory. According to Telesio, our memory is not visual.
What we remember are movements which our spirit has experienced and
given out when being in contact with external forces. If now the
spirit undergoes a similar experience, for example the pain of getting
burned, it will ascribe this perception to a similar or identical
cause and call it ‘fire’ (DRN book VIII, ch. 1; vol. III,
p. 160). The ability of making rational conclusions
(
ratiocinari
) consists in comparing new expierences to old
ones and in supplementing hidden or unknown aspects when refering them
to former experiences. Telesio even suggests replacing the term
intelligere
with
existimari
and
commemorari
(DRN book VIII, ch. III; vol. III, p. 164f.). Intellectual
understanding therefore does not mean to reach a realm of necessity
and eternity, not even in mathematics, which according to Telesio
arises from sensual experience and is a science of less dignity than
the observation-based natural philosophy (DRN book VIII, ch. IV; vol.
III, p. 176f.).
6. Ethics
The ethics exposed in the 9
th
book of
De rerum
natura
is strictly naturalist. The only objective which Telesio
ascribes to the spirit is self-preservation and self-improvement, the
former lying in its ability to react suitably to influences from the
external world, the latter in its capability of finding means to
improve its state of being. This comes about through theoretical
knowledge, specifically through natural philosophy and medicine (cf.
DRN book VIII, ch. XXI) and through learning to control one’s own
emotions and desires. According to Telesio, we can voluntarily provoke
and suppress affections and their related actions (DRN book IX, ch. I;
vol. III, p. 332f.); what is more, we are able to master the degree to
which we desire and are affected (DRN book IX, ch. II; vol. III, p.
334). The principle of moral virtue is said to be a knowledge of what
is helpful and what is damaging for survival and well-being in human
society. All virtues and vices are reduced to self-conservation.
7. Science and Religion
Whereas medieval and Renaissance authors often seemed to rely on the
double-truth theory in order to maintain the freedom of scientific
research and teaching, Telesio maintained a purely scientific
approach. But he did not deny the existence of God and of the human
soul. Telesio’s God is not the God who acts in nature and history,
though he did not deny the possibility of miracles (DRN book IV, ch.
XXV; vol. I, p. 176). The God Telesio seems to imagine can be compared
to a mechanic. Just as the best mechanic creates an artefact which
will work without interruption and default, so the power of the
almighty divine artist is represented in a cosmos which is able to
generate and to sustain itself without ever running the danger of
corruption (see DRN book I, ch. X).
Besides the natural soul or spirit Telesio accepted the existence of
an immortal soul superimposed by God (DRN book V, ch. II–III).
But in his theory of psychology and ethics the soul does not play any
significant role, for which reason researchers have often held it to
be an addition designed to avoid conflicts with the Church. On the
other hand, there do exist certain modes of behavior which cannot be
explained in a purely naturalistic and materialistic way, such as the
human striving for eternity and the martyrs’ denial of the highest
objective of self-preservation. But far from building a bridge to the
philosophical tradition, Telesio’s definition of a second, divinely
superimposed soul as “forma corporis et praecipue
spiritus” deals a deathblow to Aristotle’s teachings. According
to Telesio, the idea of an immortal soul was totally unknown to the
heathen Aristotle, who is severely criticized for confusing the
concept of a natural spirit with the religious idea of a soul (DRN
book V, ch. II–III):
And when we have reproved Aristotle and will continue to reprove him
for having introduced the soul into the body as its peculiar form, we
have not condemned him and we will not condemn him because he equated
the soul created by God (a thing which one might suspect was
completely unknown to him) with the form of humans, but rather
because... he equated the soul which was generated from the semen and
which is the only one which senses, causes movements and is (so to
speak) something akin to the semen, with the form of the body. (Vol.
II, p. 218f.)
Nonetheless, the few pages which Telesio dedicated to the immortal
soul do not open a path to metaphysical or theological theories. In
science, Telesio adheres to a naturalistic worldview. It was Tommaso
Campanella who combined Telesian naturalism with a theory of the anima
creata and human mind which he based upon sceptical doubts. (Boenke
2005, Ernst 2014, Bondì 2018).
Bibliography
Works by Telesio
De rerum natura iuxta propria principia
De natura iuxta propria principia liber primus et
secundus
. Romae, apud Antonium Bladum, 1565.
Ed. Alessandro Ottaviani, Torino: Nino Aragno, 2006 (Edizione
Nazionale delle Opere di Bernardino Telesio vol I).
Facsimile ed. Roberto Bondi (2011). Also contains “Ad
Felicem Moimonam iris” (1565), Roma: Carocci. (Telesiana I,
preface N. Ordine).
Delle cose naturali libri due – Opusculi – Polemiche
telesiani, volgarizzamento di Francesco Martelli [1573], reprint ed.
Anna Laura Puliafito (2013) with introduction and index, Roma: Carocci
(Telesiana 5).
De rerum natura iuxta propria principia liber primus, et
secundus, denuo editi
. Neapoli: apud Iosephum Cacchium, 1570.
Facsimile ed. Maurizio Torrini (1989), Napoli: Istituto Suor
Orsola Benincasa.
Facsimile ed. Roberto Bondi (2013). Also contains Opuscula (1570):
“De his quae in aere fiunt et de terremotibus”; “De
colorum generatione”; “De mare”, Roma: Carocci.
(Telesiana II, preface N. Ordine).
La natura secondo i suoi principi, con testo originale a fronte
secondo l’edizione del 1570, ed. Roberto Bondi (2009), Milano:
Bompiani. (1st ed. Firenze 1999).
La naturaleza según sus propios principios (Libros primeiro
y segundo nuevamente editados) Nápoles 1570, traducción,
introducción y notas de Miguel Saralegui (2013), Madrid:
Tecnos
De rerum natura iuxta propria principia libri IX
.
Neapoli: apud Horatium Salvianum, 1586.
Facsimile ed. Guido Giglioni (2013), with introduction and index,
Roma: Carocci (Telesiana 4)
Facsimile ed. Cesare Vasoli (1971), Hildesheim, New York: G.
Olms.
Ed. and Ital. transl. by Luigi De Franco (1965–1974). 3
vols, I-II: Cosenza (Casa del Libro) 1965, 1974, III: Firenze: La
Nuova Italia, 1976 (cited here as
DRN
).
Varii de naturalibus rebus libelli
Varii de naturalibus rebus libelli ab Antonio Persio
editi
. Quorum alii nunquam antea excusi, alii meliores facti
prodeunt. Sunt autem hi: De cometis et lacteo circulo, De his quae in
aere fiunt, De iride, De mari, Quod animal universum, De usu
respirationis, De coloribus, De saporibus, De somno. Unicuique libello
appositus est capitum index. Venetiis: apud Felicem Valgrisium, 1590.
Facsimile ed. Miguel A. Granada (2012), Roma: Carocci. (Telesiana
5)
Prima edizione integrale, ed. Luigi De Franco (1981). Also
contains “Solutiones objectionum Francisci Patritii”;
“Ad Johannam Castriotam Carmen”. Firenze: La Nuova Italia.
(Cited here as
Varii libelli
).
Recent editions of singular works
“Il commentario ‘De fulmine’ di Bernardino
Telesio”, ed. Carlo Delcorno (1967),
Aevum
, XLI:
474–506.
Ad Felicem Moimonam Iris
, facsimile ed. and introd.
Roberto Bondì (2009), Paris: Les Belles Lettres.
De iis quae in aere fiunt et de terraemotibus
–
De mari
, ed. Luigi De Franco with Ital. transl. by F.
Martelli (1990), Cosenza: Bios.
De saporibus opusculum
, ed. and Ital. transl. by Giovanni
Gentile and Guido Francesco, (1968), Roma: Arti grafiche E.
Cossidente.
Sobre los cometas y la Vía Láctea
., ed.
Miguel A. Granada (2012), with Spanish transl., introduction and
notes, Madrid: Tecnos.
Summaries and contemporary works on Telesio
Bacon, Francis: De principiis atque originibus secundum fabulas
cupidinis et coeli. Opera Omnia ed. J. Spedding, R.L. Ellis, D.D.
Heath, Vol III, London 1887, facsimile ed. Stuttgart – Bad
Cannstatt 1963, pp. 79–118, (pp. 94–118 on Telesio).
D’Aquino, Gio. Paolo:
Orazione in morte di Bernardino Telesio
Philosopho Eccellentissimo agli Academici Cosentini
, in Cosenza
per Leonardo Angrisano 1596.
Patrizi, Francesco, “Obiectiones”, in Bernadino
Telesio, Varii libelli (op. cit.), ed. De Franco, pp.
463–474.
Persius, Antonius, “Apologia pro Bern. Telesio adversus
Franciscum Patritium”, in Bernadino Telesio, Varii libelli (op.
cit.), pp. 474–495.
Quattromani, Sertorio,
La filosofia di Bernardino Telesio
ristretta in brevità et scritta in lingua toscana
(Neapoli
1589), ed. E. Troilo, Bari 1914.
For a complete list of contemporary and early Telesio editions see
Giliola Barbero and Adriana Paolini (2017),
Le edizioni antiche
di Bernardino Telesio: censimento e storia
, Paris: Les Belles
Lettres.
Secondary literature
Conference proceedings, miscellaneous works and exhibition catalogues
Atti del Convegno Internazionale di Studi su Bernardino
Telesio
(Cosenza, 12–13 maggio 1989). Ed. 1990, Cosenza:
Accademia Cosentina.
Bernardino Telesio e la cultura napoletana
. Atti del
Convegno internazionale, Napoli 15–17 dicembre 1989. Ed.
Raffaelo Sirri e Maurizio Torrini (1992), Napoli: Guida.
Bernardino Telesio e l’idea di natura “iuxta propria
principia”
. Mostra bibliografica, documentaria e
iconografica. Ed. 1989, Roma: Istituto Poligrafico e Zecca dello
Stato.
Bernardino Telesio nel 4º centenario della morte
(1588)
. Ed. M. Santoro (1989), Napoli: Istituto Nazionale di
Studi nel Rinascimento meridionale.
Mostra bibliografica Telesiana. Celebrazioni per il IV
Centenario della morte di Bernardino Telesio 1588–1988
. Ed.
1988, Cosenza: Biblioteca Civica.
Bernardino Telesio tra filosofia naturale e scienza
moderna
. Ed. Giuliana Mocchi, Sandra Plastina, Emilio Sergio
(2012), Pisa, Roma: Fabrizio Serra. (
Bruniana e
Campanelliana
, Suppl. XXXV, Studi 14).
Bernardino Telesio y la nueva imagen de la naturaleza en el
Renacimento
. Ed. Miguel A. Granada (2013), Madrid: Siruela.
Bernardino Telesio and the Natural Sciences in the
Renaissance
. Ed. Pietro Daniel Omodeo (2019), Leiden, Boston:
Brill.
Selected articles and monographs
Abbagnano, Nicola, 1941,
Bernardino Telesio e la filosofia del
Rinascimento
, Milano: Garzanti.
Agrimi, Mario, 1992, “Telesio nel Seicento
napoletano”, in
Bernadino Telesio e la cultura
napoletana
, Napoli: Guida, pp. 331–372.
–––, 1991, “Il rapporto Parmenide –
Telesio dal Persio aal Maranta”,
Giorn. crit. filos. ital
,
70: 15–34.
Artese, Luciano, 1987, “Filosofia telesiana e ramismo in un
inedito di Antonio Persio”, in
Giornale Critica della
Filosofia Italiana
, LXVI: 433–458.
Barbero, Giliola and Paolini, Andrea, 2017,
Le edizioni
antiche di Bernardino Telesio: censimento e storia
. Con premessa
di Nuccio Ordine, presentazione di Roberto Bondí, Paris: Les
Belles Lettres.
Bianchi, Lorenzo, 1992, “Des novateurs modernes en la
philosophie: Telesio tra eruditi e libertini nella Francia del
Seicento”, in
Bernardino Telesio e la cultura
napoletana
, Napoli: Guida, pp. 374–416.
Bidwell-Steiner, Marlen, 2012, “Metabolisms of the Soul: The
Physiology of Bernardino Telesio in Oliva Sabuco’s Nueva
filosofía de la naturaleza del hombre (1587)”, in
Blood, Sweat and Tears. The changing concepts of physiology from
Antiquity into Early Modern Europe
, Manfred Horstmanshoff, Helen
King, and Claus Zittel (eds.), Leiden, Boston: Brill, pp.
661–683.
Boenke, Michaela, 2005,
Körper, Spiritus, Geist:
Psychologie vor Descartes
, München: Fink.
Bondí, Roberto, 2018a, “Dangerous Ideas: Telesio,
Campanella and Galileo”, in
Copernicus Banned. The Entangled
Matter of the Anti-Copernican Decree of 1616
, N. Fabbri and F.
Favino (eds.), Firenze: Olschki, pp. 1–27.
–––, 2018b,
Il primo dei moderni. Filosofia
e scienza in Bernardino Telesio
, Roma: Edizioni di storia e
letteratura.
–––, 2014, “Il Telesio di Bacon”, in
La raggione curiosa. Atti del convegno in memoria di Paolo
Rossi
, Roma: Aracne, pp. 25–48.
–––, 2013, “Dios, naturaleza y alma en
Telesio”, in
Bernardino Telesio y la nueva imagen de la
naturalezza en el Renacimiento
, Migual Á. Granada (ed.),
Madrid: Siruela, pp. 21–42.
–––, 2006, “
Omnia mutantur, nihil
interit
. Telesio e la teoria della generazione e della
corruzione”, in
Homo moriens. Ermeneutiche della morte da
Omero a oggi
, Marcello Zanatta (ed.), Cosenza: Pellegrini, pp.
281–292.
–––, 2000, “Tempo ed
eternità”, in
Segni e percorsi della
modernità: saggi in onore di Paolo Rossi
, F. Abbri and M.
Segala (eds.), Arezzo: Università degli Studi di Siena, pp.
1–16.
–––, 1997,
Introduzione a Telesio
,
Roma, Bari: Laterza.
De Franco, Luigi, 1995,
Introduzione a Bernardino
Telesio
, Soveria Manelli: Rubbettino.
–––, 1989,
Bernardino Telesio. La vita e
l’opera
, Cosenza: Edizioni Periferia.
Ebbersmeyer, Sabrina, 2019, “Renaissance Theories of the
Passions: Embodies Minds”, in
Philosophy of Mind in the Late
Middle Ages and Renaissance
, Stephan Schmid (ed.), London, New
York: Routledge, pp. 185–206.
–––, 2013, “Do Humans Feel
Differently”, in
The Animal Soul and the Human Mind
,
Cecilia Muratori (ed.), Pisa-Roma: Fabrizio Serra Editore, pp.
97–111.
Ernst, Germana, 2014, “Tommaso Campanella”,
The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2014 Edition), Edward
N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2014/entries/campanella/
>.
Fiorentino, Francesco, 1872–74,
Bernardino Telesio,
ossia studi su l’idea della natura nel Risorgimento
italiano
, 2 vols, Firenze: Successori le Monnier; reprinted with
an introduction and bibliographic notes in Roberto Bondí (ed.),
Cosenza: Pellegrini, 2018.
Firpo, Luigi, 1951, “La proibizione di Telesio”,
Rivista di filosofia
, XLII: 30–47.
Fragale, Luca Irwin, 2016, “Bernardino Telesio in due
inediti programmi giovanili”, in
Microstoria e Araldica di
Calabria Citeriore e di Cosenza. Da fonti documentarie inedite
,
Milano: The Writer, pp.  11–32.
Garber, Daniel, 2016, “Telesio among the Novatores:
Telesio’s reception in the Seventeenth Century”, in
Early Modern Philosophers and the renaissance legacy
, Cecilia
Muratori and Gianna Paganini (eds.), Cham: Springer.
Garin, Eugenio, 1979, “Nota telesiana: Antonio Persio”
and “Postilla telesiana”, in
La cultura filosofica del
Rinascimento italiano. Ricerche e documenti
, Firenze: Sansoni,
pp. 432–450.
Gentile, Giovani, 1911,
Bernardino Telesio, con appendice
bibiografica
, Bari: Laterza e Figli; reprinted in Roberto
Bondí (ed.), Cosenza: Pellegrini, 2018.
Giachetti, Assenza, 1980, “Bernardino Telesio, Il migliore
dei moderni. I riferimenti a Telesio negli scritti di Bacone”,
Rivist Critica di Storia della Filosofia
, XXXV:
41–80.
Giglioni, Guido, 2010, “The first of the moderns or the last
of the ancients? B.T. on nature and sentience”, in
Bruniana
e Campanelliana
, XVI(1): 69–87.
–––, 2011, “Spirito e coscienza nella
medicina di Bernardino Telesio”, in
‘Virtù
ascosta e negletta’: La Calabria nella modernità
,
Germana Ernst and Rosa M. Calcaterra (eds.), Milano: Angeli, pp.
154–168.
Gómes López, Susanna, 2013, “Telesio y el
debate sobre la naturaleza de la luz en el Renacimiento
italiano”, in
Bernardino Telesio y la nueva imagen de la
naturaleza en el Renacimento
, Miguel A. Granada (ed.), Madrid:
Siruela, pp. 194–236.
Granada, Miguel A., 2019, “‘Spiritus’ and
‘anima a Deo immissa’ in Telesio”, in
Bernardino
Telesio and the Natural Sciences in the Renaissance
, Pietro
Daniel Omodeo (ed.), Leiden: Brill, pp. 33–50.
–––, 2013, “Telesio y las novedades
celestes: la teoria telesiana de los cometas”, in
Bernardino
Telesio y la nueva imagen de la naturaleza en el Renacimento
,
Miguel A. Granada (ed.), Madrid: Siruela, pp. 116–149.
Hatfield, Gary, 1992, “Descartes’ Physiology and its
relation to his psychology”, in
The Cambridge Companion to
Descartes
, J. Cottingham (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 334–370.
Ingegno, Alfonso, 1989, “Corpo, spiritus, anima. Il problema
della libertà in B. Telesio”, in
Bernardino Telesio
nel 4º centenario della morte
, Napoli: Istituto Nazionale di
Studi nel Rinascimento meridionale, pp. 51–70.
Kessler, Eckhard, 1992, “Selbstorganisation in der
Naturphilosophie der Renaissance”, in
Selbstorganisation.
Jahrbuch für Komplexität in den Natur-, Sozial- und
Geisteswissenschaften
, 3: 15–29.
Kristeller, Paul Oskar, 1964, “Telesio”, in
Eight
Philosophers of the Italian Renaissance
, Stanford: Stanford
University Press.
Leijenhorst, Cees, 2010, “Bernardino Telesio
(1509–1588): New fundamental principles of nature”, in
Philosophers of the Renaissance
, Paul Richard Blum (ed.),
Brian McNeil (trans.), Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of
America Press, pp. 168–180.
–––, 1998,
Hobbes and the Aristotelians. The
Aristotelian Setting of Thomas Hobbes’s Natural Philosophy
,
Utrecht: Zeno Institute of Philosophy, pp. 116ff.
Lerner, Michel-Pierre, 2007, “Telesio e Campanella: de la
nature ‘iuxta propria principia’ á la nature
‘instrumentum Dei’”, in Bruniana & Campanelliana
XIII: 79–97.
–––, 1992, “Le
‘parménidisme’ de Telesio: Origine et limites d’un
hypothèse”, in
Bernardino Telesio e la cultura
napoletana
, Napoli: Guida, pp. 79–105.
–––, 1992 “La physique céleste de
Telesio: problèmes d’interprétation”, in
Atti del Convegno Internazionale di Studi su B. Telesio (Cosenza,
12–13 maggio 1989), Cosenza: Accademia Cosentina, pp.
83–114; Spanish version in
Bernardino Telesio y la nueva
imagen de la naturaleza en el Renacimento
, Miguel A. Granada
(ed.), Madrid: Siruela, 2013.
–––, 1986, “Aristote ‘oublieux de
lui-même’ selon B. Telesio”, in
Les
Études Philosophiques
, 3: 371–389.
Lupi, Walter F., 2011,
Alle origine della Academia
Telesiana
, Cosenza: Brenner.
Margolin, Jean-Claude, 1990, “Bacon, lectuer critique
d´Aristôte e de Telesio”, in
Convegno internazionale di
studi su Bernardino Telesio
, Cosenza: Accadimia di Cosenza, pp.
135–166.
Martano, Giuseppe, 1989, “La ‘svolta’ telesiana
nella storia di concetti di spazio e tempo”, in
Bernardino
Telesio nel 4º centenario della morte
, Napoli: Istituto
Nazionale di Studi nel Rinascimento meridionale, pp.
71–101.
Mulsow, Martin, 2019, “A Conversation by Telesio: Sensualism,
Criticism of Aristotle, and the Theory of Light in the Late
Renaissance”, in
Bernardino Telesio and the Natural Sciences in
the Renaissance
,  Pietro Daniel Omodeo (ed.), pp.
167–190.
–––, 1998,
Frühneuzeitliche
Selbsterhaltung. Telesio und die Naturphilosophie der
Renaissance
, Tübingen: Niemayer.
Muratori, Cecilia, 2013, “The Earth’s perilous
fertility: Telesio on spontaneous generation and the continuity of
living beings”, in
The Animal Soul and the Human Mind.
Renaissance debates
, C. Muratori (ed.), pp. 131–152.
Ottaviani, Alessandro, 2012, “Telesio, Bernardino” in
Il Contributo italiano alla storia del Pensiero –
Filosofia
, Roma: Istituto dell’Enciclopedia Italiana.
Plastina, Sandra, 2012, “Bernardino Telesio
nell’Inghilterra del Seicento”, in
Bernardino Telesio
tra filosofia naturale e scienza moderna
, Giuliana Mocchi et al.
(eds.), Roma: Serra, pp. 133–144.
Puliafito, Anna Laura, 1992, “La fisica telesiana attraverso
gli occhi di un contemporaneo: Francesco Patrizi da Chierso”, in
Bernadino Telesio e la cultura napoletana
, Napoli: Guida, pp.
257–270.
Pupo, Spartaco, 1999,
L’anima immortale in Telesio. Per una
storia delle interpretazione
, Cosenza: Pellegrini.
Randall, John Hermann Jr., 1962,
The Career of
Philosophy
, 2 vols.
Vol I: From the Middle Ages to the
Enlightenment
, New York: Columbia University Press.
Rees, Graham, 1984,
Francis Bacon’s Natural Philosophy: A New
Source
(with editorial assistance by Christopher Upton), Chalfont
St. Giles: The Bristish Society for the History of Science, pp.
3–78.
–––, 1977, “Matter Theory: A Unifying
Factor in Bacon’s Natural Philosophy?”,
Ambix
, XXIV:
110–125.
Schuhmann, Karl, 1992, “Le concept de l’espace chez
Telesio”, in
Bernardino Telesio e la cultura
napoletana
, Napoli: Guida, pp. 141–167.
–––, 1990, “Hobbes and Renaissance
Philosophy”, in
Hobbes Oggi
, Milano: Franco Angeli
Editore, pp. 331–349.
–––, 1990, “Telesio’s Concept of
Matter”, in
Atti del Convegno Internazionale
, Napoli:
Guida, pp. 115–134.
–––, 1988, “Zur Entstehung des
neuzeitlichen Zeitbegriffs: Telesio, Patrizi, Gassendi”, in
Philosophia naturalis
, 25: 37–64.
Sergio, Emilio, 2013,
Bernardino Telesio: Una biografia
,
Napoli: Guida.
–––, 2012, “L’Accademia Cosentina e
l’eredita del naturalismo telesiano”, in
Storia del
pensiero filosofico in Calabria da Pitagora ai giorni nostri
,
Mario Alcaro (ed.), Soveria Mannelli: Rubbetino, pp.
259–272..
Spruit, Leen, 2018, “Bernardino Telesio on Spirit, Sense,
and Imagination”, in
Image, Imagination and Cognition.
Medieval and Early Modern Theory and Practice
, Chistoph
Lüthi, Claudia Swan, Paul J.J. M. Bakker and Claus Zittel (eds.),
Leiden: Brill, pp. 94–116.
–––, 1997, “Telesio’s reform of the
philosophy of mind”, in
Brunoniana e Campanelliana
, 2:
124–143.
Tutrone, Fabio, 2014, “The Body of the Soul. Lucretian Echoes in
the Renaissance Theories on the Psychic Substance and its Organic
Repartion”, in
Gesnerus
, 71(2): 204–236.
Van Deusen, N.C., 1932,
Telesio: The First of the
Moderns
, New York: Columbia University Press.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Telesio
,
 in the Catalog of the Scientific Community, Galileo project,
maintained by Albert Van Helden and Elizabeth Burr (Rice
University)
Bernardino Telesio
(1509–1588), entry by Emilio Sergio in
The
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
.
Related Entries
Aristotle, General Topics: metaphysics
|
Aristotle, General Topics: psychology
|
Bacon, Francis
|
Bruno, Giordano
|
Campanella, Tommaso
|
Cardano, Girolamo [Geronimo]
|
Descartes, René
|
Galen
|
Gassendi, Pierre
|
Patrizi, Francesco
|
Plato: ethics
|
soul, ancient theories of
|
Stoicism