Continental Feminism
First published Tue Nov 10, 2020
Continental feminism denotes an approach to feminist issues in
philosophy and the world
both
via figures and methods of what
is called the “Continental” tradition in philosophy
and
via critical interventions into this tradition.
Continental tradition in philosophy today refers to a set of
nineteenth and twentieth century figures and theoretical traditions
from mainland Europe, arising as a way for English-speaking
philosophers in the United States to distinguish their approach to
philosophical questions from that of the analytic tradition. By
utilizing one or more of the signature schemas of the Continental
tradition, Continental feminists contribute to problem areas ranging
from metaphysics, epistemology, aesthetics, ethics, and social and
political philosophy. Continental feminism thus refers to a body and
style of work consisting of feminist interpretations of mainstream
Continental figures (largely from what is called “Continental
Europe”, such as Hegel, Levinas, Derrida, Foucault); feminist
uses of psychoanalysis, phenomenology, deconstruction, genealogy, and
critical theory; and of interpretations of European feminists and
figures such as de Beauvoir, Irigaray, Arendt, and Kristeva. Note,
however, that Europe is not and has never been a continent, and in
this sense, Continental feminism, like Continental philosophy, is more
of an imagined community of approaches, figures, and traditions, or an
umbrella concept, rather than a precise term.
Elaine Miller points out that the term “Continental
feminism” came into circulation in the United States in 2007
(Miller 2017); as she defines it, Continental feminism
involves a commitment to the historicity of philosophical concepts,
including the sometimes-uncomfortable contexts of their production, a
belief that it is through the examination of texts that the genealogy
of ideas can be traced and resources for critically responding to them
can be formulated, and that the “canon” is subject to
constant re-interrogation and reconfiguration. (Miller 2017: 154)
In Allison Stone’s terms,
describing the world as it really is—not as an aggregate of
static items but as an ever-shifting web of relations—calls for
unfamiliar, difficult language. (Stone 2015: 4)
A distinguishing feature of Continental feminism, Miller and Stone
agree, is that it
embodies a refusal to
prima facie
privilege clarity and
succinctness of argument over acknowledging through language the
complexity, difficulty, and problematic nature of the issues being
addressed. (Miller 2017: 154; Stone 2015: 2)
As a way of beginning to address the Euro- and U.S.-centric biases of
continental philosophy, a transContinental turn in Continental
feminism proposed by Kyoo Lee and Alyson Cole aims to incorporate a
global view of feminist issues and theories, where
“trans” serves as a marker for the constant geo-cultural
flows of ideas in transit, as in “transatlantic”,
“transpacific”, “transoceanic”, etc., as well
as for cutting-edge works, conversations, and debates in
trans-critical, cultural, disciplinary, human, gender, genic, lingual,
medial, national fields, etc., and as trans*feminist discourses. (Cole
and Lee 2019: iv)
Accordingly, this entry will take Continental feminism to include the
following distinct yet related set of issues and areas: (1) the
feminist use of figures, traditions, and approaches of
phenomenology/existentialism, psychoanalysis, post-structuralism
(deconstruction and genealogy), and critical theory; (2) critical
interventions into the assumptions about sex, gender, class, race,
ability, religion, and age endemic to European philosophy; and (3)
interpretations of hitherto underrepresented figures and methods of
feminism from a transContinental and transAtlantic perspective that
establish new, abandoned, or previously delegitimated genealogies for
feminist thought.
It is important to note that not all Continental feminists are
philosophers or work in Philosophy departments; thus, Continental
feminism is interdisciplinary and its practitioners come from various
fields. As this subfield developed in the early 2000s, there were
already disciplinary, intra-disciplinary and extra-disciplinary
projects that explored feminist issues by utilizing phenomenological,
psychoanalytic, deconstructive, and critical theoretical approaches.
Rather than organizing this entry around the signature schemas of the
Continental tradition and subsuming ongoing work that uses these
approaches under them, this entry will locate crucial genealogies for
Continental feminism in the work of Black feminists, post- and
decolonial feminists, women of color feminists, Asian American
feminists, trans feminists, and queer feminists. We take these
genealogies as central to the past, present, and future of Continental
feminism, and accordingly this entry is organized topically, in order
to outline the ways that Continental feminisms have developed in
conversation and in tension with these interdisciplinary projects.
These projects have been unearthing the cissexist,
sexist/misogynistic, racist, heterosexist, classist, ageist, ableist,
colonial commitments of philosophy as a discipline and a professional
field as they are simultaneously expanding, transforming, and pushing
the concerns and methods of Continental thought in interdisciplinary
iterations. Indeed, what distinguishes Continental feminism clearly
from Analytic feminism are its call for interdisciplinarity and its
belief that feminist omissions themselves can become sites from which
new projects are launched, as will be highlighted throughout this
entry. As such, Continental feminism starts with the premise that
European or Anglo-American norms and categories of thought can be
interpreted, critiqued, and re-envisioned or abandoned for feminist
purposes.
1. Characteristics of Continental Feminism
2. Continental Feminism and Black Feminist Thought
3. Continental Feminism and Post- and Decolonial Thought
4. Continental Feminism and Queer Theory/Queer of Color Critique
5. Continental Feminism and Trans Studies
6. Continental Feminism and Asian American Feminist Thought
7. Conclusion and New Directions in Continental Feminism
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Characteristics of Continental Feminism
Continental feminists share with other Continental thinkers an
interest in close reading that uses careful exegesis to unpack the
deep meanings of texts through attention to their linguistic and
historical specificity. However, to utilize a philosophical tradition
that has largely presumed rather than explored the impacts of sex and
gender on material life, continental feminists often read irreverently
to focus on concerns that traditional philosophy might push to the
side. While all feminist theorizing deals with questions of power,
subjectivity, and culture, Continental feminist approaches to these
issues are often
critical
in the sense that they explore how
external power dynamics affect the constitution of inner experiences,
and in turn how embodied and subjective re-articulations of power can
and should transform the world in the pursuit of justice. This
frequently involves taking lived experience as a crucial component of
critical philosophy; as Gail Weiss puts it,
only by interrogating the “ordinary” dimensions of
experience is it possible to arrive at an understanding of the dynamic
forces that give meaning to individual lives and that are both the
obstacle and the vehicle to achieving lasting social change. (Weiss
2008: 5)
To present a broad sketch of characteristics of continental feminism
throughout its history, this section focuses on methods that
Continental feminists use to engage embodied experience in their
projects. The gendered critique of the traditional Western
philosophical tendency to dichotomize the body that feels and the mind
that thinks is an ongoing theme in continental feminism (see entry on
feminist perspectives on the body
).
 The account presented here is not at all complete, as the specific
aims and methods of such feminist projects differ widely, most
importantly in terms of how an analysis of sex and gender is impacted
by other aspects of embodied experience such as race, sexuality, and
ability. This section first addresses some ways that continental
feminists trouble a mind-body distinction by engaging affect and
emotion in their work. Next, it explores two examples of how
continental traditions, psychoanalysis and phenomenology, are made
into critical resources in Continental feminist projects. Finally, it
presents work that engages an ongoing critique of culture and everyday
experience as an important aspect of feminist theorizing.
Many Continental feminists focus on the overlaying of mental and
physical experience via the concepts of affect, emotion, and feeling.
Affect is described by Teresa Brennan as “the physiological
shift accompanying a judgment” (Brennan 2004: 5). The
“transmission of affect” describes the way that one can
catch the mood of another; this experience is “social in origin
but biological and physical in effect” (Brennan 2004: 3).
Brennan describes
transmission
as when the “emotions or
affects of one person, and the enhancing or depressing energies these
affects entail” pass from one person to another (Brennan 2004:
3). Affect is thus one way to describe how social experience impacts
the corporeal life of subjects through the transference of energy. In
Brennan’s case, affective states are
directional
; they
are not neutral but push or press on subjects. At the same time, terms
like affect and feeling might be distinguished based on the extent to
which one considers affect to be already coded with or influenced by
social significance for a subject (see Ahmed 2010: 230–231,
Seigworth & Gregg 2010, esp. 5–8).
Continental feminist projects on emotion often analyze historically
contextualized experiences. Ann Cvetkovich engages with trauma in a
way that
focuses on the everyday and the insidious…and situates it in a
social and cultural frame rather than a medical one. (Cvetkovich 2007:
464)
She then presents a political account of depression that
depathologizes such negatively-connotated emotional experiences so
that they can become more visible in public and thus create a
potential foundation for community (Cvetkovich 2007: 460). In
The
Cultural Politics of Emotion
, Sara Ahmed argues that emotion is
generated when meaning is produced across social-political
interaction; these feelings create the boundaries of affinity groups
and impact self-understanding. In this analysis, emotions help
constitute what a person understands as their objective condition, and
thus
emotions are not “in” either the individual or the social,
but produce the very surfaces and boundaries that allow all kinds of
objects to be delineated. (Ahmed 2004 [2014: 10])
Because feeling is often ambivalent and multi-faceted, rather than in
spite of this complexity, social critics who attend to how affects are
employed and manipulated in both textual and social-political
argumentation can produce readings that trouble an easy dichotomy
between what is a “good” and what a “bad”
experience.
Psychoanalytically-informed projects use concepts such as trauma,
mourning, melancholia, and abjection to analyze embodied experience
(Irigaray 1974 [1985]; Spillers 1996; Butler 1997; Felman 2002; Oliver
2004; entry on
psychoanalytic feminism
).
 They frequently engage aesthetics as an aspect of social critique
(Chanter 2008; Kristeva 1980 [1982]; Miller 2014). This allows a
symptomatic reading of feeling to be interpreted back against the
social order, as is seen in Judith Butler’s
Frames of
War
. In this text, Butler analyzes what makes a life grievable
and argues that the questions of who appears as a human, whose life
should be protected, and who does not are all figured in advance of
any particular political decision through a pre-reflexive manipulation
of affect (Butler 2009 [2016: 64]). Supplementing democratic theory
with Continental feminist interpretations, Noëlle McAfee deploys
Kristeva and the resources in her thought, as well as psychoanalysis,
specifically on the issues of affect and the notion of the
“political unconscious” (McAfee 2000 and 2008).
Critical phenomenologists draw on the methods of phenomenology to
demonstrate “the multiple ways in which power moves through our
bodies and our lives” (Introduction, Weiss, Murphy, &
Salamon 2020: xiv). Lisa Guenther understands critical phenomenology
as both a way of doing philosophy and a way of approaching political
activism (Guenther 2020: 15). Most characteristically, Guenther argues
that critical phenomenology employs reworked versions of
Merleau-Ponty’s concept of the body schema to account for
gendered and sexual schemas (Simone de Beauvoir, Iris Marion Young,
Talia Mae Bettcher, Gayle Salamon), racialized schemas (Frantz Fanon,
Lewis Gordon, Sara Ahmed, George Yancy, Alia Al-Saji), disability
schemas (Kay Toombs, Lisa Diedrich, Havi Carel), and other aspects of
lived experience. (Guenther 2020: 13–14)
A recent volume edited by Gail Weiss, Ann V, Murphy, and Gayle
Salamon, entitled
50 Concepts for a Critical* Phenomenology
(2020), shows that many of the central concepts of critical
phenomenology intersect with Continental feminism.
Finally, considering the social and political import of inner states
and the centering of quotidian experiences of power enable Continental
feminists to explore culture as it develops. For instance, Shannon
Sullivan’s
Good White People: The Problem with Middle-Class
Anti-Racism
focuses on “the personal side of whiteness and
white privilege” with attention to the embodied experience of
race (S. Sullivan 2014: 19) to critique the ways through which white
liberals set themselves up as altruistic, “good” white
people through, e.g., hypocritical modes of tolerance that maintain
white domination (S. Sullivan 2014: 4). Robin James’
Resilience & Melancholy
explores pop music as a way to
analyze the impact of neoliberal biopolitics; she combines music
theory with psychoanalytic and Foucauldian philosophies to critique
complicity with multi-racial white supremacist patriarchy and argues
that music, e.g., Rihanna’s, offer strategies for countering
this oppressive power (R. James 2015). In
Irony in the Age of
Empire: Comic Perspectives on Philosophy and Freedom
, Cynthia
Willett engages film and stand-up comedy to articulate a libidinal
understanding of freedom that can counter the liberal paradigms of
individuality with a sense of freedom defined “in terms of
equality and solidarity” (Willett 2008: 14). Erin Tarver
analyzes practices of sports fans, with particular attention to
football, baseball, and basketball fans in the American South, to
better understand how individual and group identities are maintained
to “…shore up, reproduce, and very occasionally, subvert
racial, sexual and gender hierarchies” (Tarver 2017: 3). This
work is often interdisciplinary, and some of these projects work at
the intersection between continental and pragmatist feminisms (see
entry on
intersections between pragmatist and continental feminism
).
Simultaneously reading carefully and irreverently, continental
feminists deepen the philosophical account of experience by
integrating historically contextualized feeling into their projects,
using and transmuting philosophical traditions and traditional
figures, and interrogating everyday experiences in their embodied and
cultural specificity. This work insists that meaning and social order
function through unrecognized cooptation, subordination or exclusion
in various intersectional constellations. In general, continental
feminisms are less concerned with changing a woman’s place in a
symbolic or social system, and more focused on upending such systems,
as will be explored in more detail in the following sections.
2. Continental Feminism and Black Feminist Thought
This section on the convergences between Black and Continental
feminist thought begins with a discussion about the history of Black
feminist scholarship utilizing existential/phenomenological,
psychoanalytic, critical, and hermeneutic approaches. It then
introduces intersectionality as the major heuristic for Black feminist
theorizing, and concludes by highlighting emerging areas and
intersections between Black studies and Black feminist Continental
thought.
Black women have long been contributors to the Continental
philosophical tradition. One may argue that their contributions to
professional philosophy started after the graduation of the first
Black woman to earn the PhD in philosophy, Joyce Mitchell Cook, who
completed the degree in 1965 from Princeton University. Even prior to
this date, however, Black women engaged in projects that we can
recognize as Continental feminist projects. Importantly,
many Black intellectuals in the United States going back (at least) to
the nineteenth century offered what are now described as existential,
phenomenological, and/or genealogical analyses of race and racism.
(Belle 2012, 329 fn. 1)
These contributions did not always occur in the form of traditional
philosophical discussions, nor are they always created by those who
have professional degrees in philosophy, which is certainly true of
the nineteenth and early twentieth century thinkers, Sojourner Truth,
Maria W. Stewart, and
Anna Julia Cooper
.
Black feminists’ contributions to Continental philosophy
demonstrate the ways in which their voices are crucial to both shaping
and expanding the discipline. Kathryn Sophia Belle, Donna-Dale
Marcano, and Maria del Guadalupe Davidson edited
Convergences:
Black Feminism and Continental Philosophy
(del Guadalupe et al.
2010), the only text at the publication of this entry that addresses
both these topics simultaneously. For the editors, the concept of
convergence is demonstrated by the natural, historical, and necessary
engagement of Black women with Continental philosophy. Belle
writes,
Black feminist and womanist thinkers inevitably address the very same
issues of agency, identity, alienation, power, and so on that are
raised in much recent Continental philosophy. Likewise, from Immanuel
Kant to the feminist thinkers of the present, Continental philosophy
has engaged, to some extent, with issues of race and gender. (2010:
5)
The Black feminist tradition in Continental philosophy demonstrates
that Black women are not strangers nor enemies of Continental
philosophy; rather, their unique theoretical positioning affords them
the opportunity to utilize, challenge, and expand the tradition.
Black feminist thinkers contribute to Continental feminist thought in
at least two ways. First, they engage directly with Continental
figures and theories. For example, Lorraine Hansberry comments that
Simone de Beauvoir’s
The Second Sex
(1949, translated
in 1953) was arguably the “most important work of this
century” (1957 [1995: 129 and 133]), and Antillean thinker
Paulette Nardal draws on both features of the Harlem Renaissance and
existentialist thinkers like Jean-Paul Sartre to provide a
phenomenological and genealogical account of how the Black race, and
Antilleans in particular, have come to understand their own notion of
race consciousness in “The Awakening of Race
Consciousness” (1932). More recently, they engage with canonical
figures and ideologies of Continental philosophy, as in the work of
Kathryn Sophia Belle on Hannah Arendt (2014) or Kris Sealey on
Emmanuel Levinas (2014). Second, regardless of their professional
Philosophy degrees or lack thereof, Black feminist thinkers utilize
the tools of the Continental tradition as part of their
interdisciplinary approaches, as in the use of Foucault in the work of
Sylvia Wynter (2003) and the use of Freud, Lacan, and psychoanalysis
in the work of Hortense Spillers (1996).
Black feminist thinkers have frequently used intersectionality as an
effective entry-point into conversations with the Continental
tradition. Intersectionality is a Black feminist theory that describes
the oppression that Black women experience as a result of lying at the
nexus of simultaneously impactful identities, such as that of race,
gender, class, and sexuality. As such, intersectionality can be used
as a phenomenological tool to describe Black women’s lived
experience of oppression. While legal theorist Kimberlé
Crenshaw coined the term in 1989, the theory has been articulated at
least since the mid-nineteenth century in Sojourner Truth’s
proclamation, “Ain’t I a Woman?” (1851). In the
speech, Truth highlights that Black women are treated with less
respect than white women while bearing the same burdens of racism as
Black men. Anna Julia Cooper wrote that Black women are
confronted by a both a woman question and a race problem and is as yet
an unknown or an unacknowledged factor in both. (1892 [1988: 134])
In their collective statement from April 1977, The Combahee River
Collective argues that
Black feminism [is] the logical political movement to combat the
manifold and simultaneous oppressions that all women of color face
and that
[t]here is also undeniably a personal genesis for Black feminism, that
is, the political realization that comes from the seemingly personal
experiences of individual Black women’s lives. (Taylor 2017: 15
and 17)
Intersectionality is thus a hallmark of Black feminist thought because
it prioritizes the lived experiences of Black women. In doing so, it
supplies the tools to think about the extent to which one’s
consciousness the world is informed by experiences of racism, sexism,
classism, and homophobia.
In addition to its utility in explaining Black women’s lived
experience, intersectionality also provides tools for Black feminists
to critique the presumed whiteness and bourgeois-class status of
feminism and to combat various forms of oppression and violence. Thus,
intersectionality is also key to critiquing phenomenological analysis,
that is, analysis of lived experiences and feminist movements through
the lens of sociopolitical identities such as race, sex, and class.
Angela Davis’s text
Women, Race, & Class
(1981) is
an early model of this approach; it details the history of U.S.
women’s movements and their consideration, or lack thereof, of
the class-based and racial dimensions of womanhood. Texts such as
Patricia Hill-Collins’s
Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge,
Consciousness, and the Politics of Empowerment
(1990 [2015]) underscore
the ways in which Black women create their own epistemological
standpoint as a result of their lived experiences. In the 1970s to
90s, when Black women’s contributions to academia reached its
zenith, Black feminist scholars such as Barbara Christian in
“The Race for Theory” (1988), Toni Morrison in
Playing
in the Dark
(1992), and Audre Lorde in “The Master’s
Tools will Never Dismantle the Master’s House” (1984a) and
“Age, Race, Class, and Sex: Women Redefining Difference”
(1984b) exemplified Black women’s critiques of theoretical
approaches that adopt a “neutral” stance toward feminist
movements where neutral meant presuming all women to be white,
middle-class, young or middle-aged, and heterosexual (see also Hull,
Bell-Scott, & Smith 1982).
Current Black feminist work centers Black epistemologies,
practices, and concepts. The burgeoning scholarship of Black women
philosophers continue to push the boundaries of Continental feminism,
as in the work of Lindsey Stewart’s work on Black feminist
practices of freedom (2017), Camisha Russell’s work on the
issues of race and gender in assisted reproduction (2018), and Axelle
Karera’s work, which focuses on the Anthropocene and
antiBlackness (2019). In addition to engaging with the canonical
figures of the Continental tradition, Black thinkers harvest
philosophy from their own perspective and experience of the world as
well as their theoretical archives. Much of this more recent work
intersects with Black Studies. The work of Black thinkers from
disciplines other than philosophy are intersecting with Continental
philosophical and feminist approaches, as seen in the works of such as
Saidiya Hartman (1997, 2007, and 2019), Christina Sharpe (2016),
Rizvana Bradley (2014 and 2018), Jennifer Nash (2019), Denise Ferreira
da Silva (2007, 2014, and 2018), Riley Snorton (2017), Selamawit
Terrefe (2020), and Zakiyyah Iman Jackson (2020).
3. Continental Feminism and Post- and Decolonial Thought
Continental feminist approaches to questions on colonialism revolve
around two main sets of investigations: on the one hand, the
interrogation of the hegemony of the West as an abstract category that
is deployed strategically to exclude and inferiorize communities
deemed Non-Western (Spivak 1999; Narayan 1997; Mohanty 1984), and on
the other hand, the question of coloniality, which focuses on the
political and epistemic ordering of the globe starting with the
colonization of the Americas (Lugones 2003; Wynter 1995; Ortega 2016).
To this end, these approaches both use schemas of the Continental
tradition (such as phenomenology, psychoanalysis, genealogy,
deconstruction, and poststructuralism) and call into question the
geographic and racial assumptions that underlie Continental
philosophy. For both of these approaches, an analysis of colonialism
is inseparable from the political aim of challenging and undoing the
colonial world. This challenge entails deconstructing the categories
of the colonially determined globe (such as East-West,
Western-Non-Western, Developed-Underdeveloped, First World-Third
World, North-South) through focusing on the concrete lived experiences
of individuals and communities. This section focuses on the general
characteristics of these two Continental feminist approaches taken up
under the rough categories of postcolonial and decolonial feminisms,
with the former focusing on the Western-Non-western divide that marks
colonial relations, and the latter on the North-South dialogues that
emerge within the relations of coloniality. It concludes by
highlighting coalitional thinking, a fundamental aspect of both post-
and decolonial feminist approaches.
Postcolonial feminist approaches maintain that in order to interrogate
the hegemony of the West, it is necessary to deconstruct the ways in
which it is deployed to exclude the non-Western subject. Furthermore,
such deployment is always a strategic one, insofar as the
“West” is not a concrete geographical category, and the
paradigm of Western subjectivity is continuously built by demarcating
those who do not fit in it. Postcolonial feminisms are
interdisciplinary and not limited to the field of philosophy, and they
challenge the inscription of the gender, racial, and geographic
categories that underlie the hegemony of the Western subject. In doing
so, Continental feminist approaches engage with figures from
poststructuralism and critical theory (such as Foucault, Derrida,
Deleuze and Adorno), and they deploy methods such as genealogy and
deconstruction (Spivak 1988; Mohanty 1984), in order to question the
underlying geographic and gendered assumptions of these methods. In
“Can the Subaltern Speak?” for example, Gayatri
Chakravorty Spivak engages with French poststructuralism and questions
the paradigms of speech/reason that deny the very possibility of
capacities such as resistance for those that do not fit within the
geographic, racialized, and gendered boundaries of Western
Subjectivity (Spivak 1988). In doing so, she highlights the ways in
which poststructuralism relies upon the very categories (of speech,
reason, or universal subjectivity) that it ostensibly critiques.
The tension highlighted by Spivak, in which the Western Subject
constitutes both the dominant subject and the only subject capable of
resistance, underlies postcolonial feminisms’ critique of the
alignment of the West with modernity and progress (McClintock 1995;
Stoler 1995). Chandra Talpade Mohanty, in “Under Western
Eyes”, criticizes the hegemony of Western approaches in defining
the scope and goals of feminist struggles. Issues such as the veil
debate, in this sense, point to the political and phenomenological
racialization of the Non-Western woman (Al-Saji 2010; Sheth 2006). At
the same time, Uma Narayan draws attention to the risks of fetishizing
the category of the Non-Western and highlights how such a
fetishization remains within colonially determined divisions (Narayan
1997; Narayan & Harding 2000). Namita Goswami, in
Subjects
That Matter
, develops heterogeneity as a kind of conceptual
continuity between feminism, philosophy, and postcolonial studies,
which allows for an understanding of difference beyond oppositional
and antagonistic terms (Goswami 2019).
Decolonial feminisms emerge primarily from the U.S. Latina and Latinx
contexts and have a different genealogy, insofar as they are in
dialogue with Latin American Philosophy, Continental Philosophy,
Anglo-American Thought, and especially U.S. Women of Color feminisms.
Focusing on North-South dialogues, Latin American and Latina Feminist
philosophers such as Ofelia Schutte engage with the work of figures
such as Nietzsche, Kristeva, and Irigaray while developing Latin
American philosophy as a field in U.S. academic philosophy (Schutte
1984; 1993; for more, see the entry on
Latin American feminism
).
 Linda Martín Alcoff, for example, brings Latin American
Philosophy (particularly the work of Enrique Dussel) in dialogue with
existentialism and poststructuralism in order to develop the framework
for Latinx feminisms (Alcoff 2006, 2015).
One of the major frameworks of decolonial feminisms is “the
coloniality of power”, a term first introduced by Aníbal
Quijano, and defined as “the social classification of the
world’s population around the idea of race” (Quijano 2000:
1). In this sense, the colonization of the Americas is not only a
historical moment, but also the emergence of race and the subsequent
reorganization of the globe in accordance with what Walter Mignolo
calls “the colonial difference”, denoting the abstract
positioning of Europe as the global hegemonic power (Mignolo 2002).
Decolonial feminisms take an intersectional approach to the
coloniality of power and investigate, as María Lugones says,
“the emergence of hegemonic gender arrangements along
‘racial’ lines” starting with the colonization of
the Americas (Lugones 2007: 190). Decolonial feminists such as Lugones
and Wynter bring poststructuralist critique in dialogue with Latin
American philosophy and argue that dominant gender arrangements
themselves are colonial; these arrangements, such as patriarchy,
heterosexualism, or gender dimorphism mark concrete historical
processes of the racial inscription of gender norms, starting from and
with the coloniality of power (Lugones 2008; Oyěwùmí
2007; Wynter 2006).
Decolonial feminisms’ emphasis on historical critique is
inseparable from a concern with the concrete lived experiences of
women of color (Moraga and Anzaldúa 1981 [2015]; Pérez
1999; Lugones 2007, Sandoval 2000). Gloria Anzaldúa, in
Borderlands/La Frontera
, emphasizes bordered thinking as the
underlying logic of contemporary systems of oppression, and she
formulates the resistances of hybrid identities that emerge both out
of and in response to such bordered thinking (Anzaldúa 1987).
Mariana Ortega develops Latina feminist phenomenology in emphasizing
both the lived experience of borderlands and exile, and the
possibilities of resistance by developing “home-tactics”
in and through these experiences (Ortega 2016).
Coalitional thinking is a fundamental aspect of both post- and
decolonial feminist approaches. Mohanty calls for coalitions across
borders in thinking through the concrete lived experiences and
emphasizes the importance of situated and local struggles in
understanding hegemonic power relations.  Moraga and Anzaldúa,
in their coedited collection
This Bridge Called My Back
, call
for concrete and sustained coalitions that are based on an
intersectional understanding of women’s lives, rather than
abstract calls for sisterhood. Decolonial feminists such as Lugones,
Chela Sandoval, Ortega, and Emma Pérez, maintain that
coalitional thinking cannot be an afterthought for any anti- or
decolonial struggles (Pérez 1999; Sandoval 2000).
As Continental feminism expands, it involves further conversations
with and in-between these approaches. The questions around the
“continent” of Continental feminism, as well as how such a
continent is situated within the colonial geographic boundaries of the
West and the Global North, continue to be challenged. As spaces for
such a flow of ideas open up, further conversations on the possibility
of coalition, as well as on challenging the limits of colonial thought
continue to reshape the face of Continental feminism.
4. Continental Feminism and Queer Theory/Queer of Color Critique
The relationship between Continental feminism and queer theory is
simultaneously productive and fraught. While far from exhaustive, this
entry will first highlight some of the overlapping figures and
approaches between the two fields, including examples of scholarship
at their intersections. It will then briefly introduce one account of
the tension between them. Finally, it will close with some reflections
on the shared problems across these fields, including their
historically white and Anglo-Eurocentric approaches, as well as how
recent work in queer of color critique aligns with and points to new
directions in Continental feminism.
In the late 1980s and the early 1990s, “queer” emerged as
a reclamation of a homophobic slur and a rallying cry for a coalition
of the marginalized against the tyranny of the normal (Barker &
Scheele 2016; D. Hall & Jagose 2012; Warner 1993; Sedgwick 1993;
Anzaldúa 1991 [2009]). Formed in the crucible of the AIDS
crisis, which sharpened the need to understand the violence
experienced by people excluded by norms related to gender and
sexuality, “queer” was meant to bring attention to the
range of sexual/gender practices deemed outside the purview of the
normal. In one genealogy of queer theory, the field develops this
early activist reclamation of the term queer into a wide-reaching
critique of how norms operate in and through dominant
conceptualizations of identity. Given this motivating impulse of
deconstruction, or of denaturalizing categories such as sexuality, it
is perhaps of no surprise that queer theory has historically been a
field well-populated with figures (e.g., Lacan, Foucault, Derrida) and
methodological approaches (poststructuralism, psychoanalysis,
phenomenology) that have been associated with Continental philosophy,
especially twentieth century European philosophy.
Queer theory frequently draws on, critiques, and expands the ideas of
many figures and approaches that are seen as early progenitors of
Continental feminism (e.g., Beauvoir, Irigaray, Kristeva, feminist
phenomenology, feminist poststructuralism, critical theory,
psychoanalytic theory). As Jagose (2009) points out, however, the
critique of normative identity categories was not invented by queer
theory, given that feminist scholarship has a rich history of
radically disrupting the category of women along lines of race and
sexuality. Moreover, the lines between feminism and queer theory are
historically blurred. For example, Judith Butler—who is often
cited as an originator of queer theory—explicitly marks her
early work as occurring in the intersection of these fields (as well
as a number of other critical discourses) (1997). In
Gender
Trouble
(1990) and
Bodies that Matter
(1993), Butler
draws on Continental feminist figures such as Irigaray, Beauvoir, and
Kristeva, and methods ranging from psychoanalysis to poststructuralism
and phenomenology to develop a simultaneously queer and feminist
theoretical lens focused on understanding the relationship between
gender and sexuality, as well as the operation of norms and identity
categories more broadly (Salih 2002).
A second major figure in the relationship between Continental feminism
and queer theory is Michel Foucault, who has been extensively used in
both queer and Continental (and specifically poststructuralist)
feminist theory, but who (as opposed to Butler) did not explicitly use
the terms queer and feminist. While a larger account of the connection
between Foucault and queer theory is beyond the scope of this entry,
the relationship is a rich one. In the late 1980s, Foucault’s
The
History of Sexuality, Volume One
was read
heavily by activists and scholars questioning dominant narratives
around sexuality and identity (Halperin 1995); Foucault’s work
was also influential not only for Judith Butler’s
Gender
Trouble
(1990) but also for another text often cited as
foundational for queer theory, Eve Sedgwick’s
Epistemology
of the Closet
(1990 [2008]).
Foucault’s genealogical approach to identity, including his
exploration of the histories and models of power at work in modern
conceptions of sexuality, has been important for a number of
contemporary scholars working at the intersections of feminism and
queer theory (Huffer 2010 and 2020; Russell 2010; Sawicki 2005;
Schotten 2018; Winnubst 2006). For example, Ladelle McWhorter (1999)
takes up Foucault’s account of ethics as a practice of the self,
or how we work on ourselves to become particular kinds of people,
through a queer framework that resists expected developmental
trajectories and normative timelines of a life (e.g., heterosexual
coupling resulting in marriage and children). And in a different vein,
Jasbir Puar (2007) has drawn on Foucault’s theories of power (as
well as a wide range of interdisciplinary theory including
postcolonial feminist theory) to analyze the relationship between
contemporary biopower and homonationalism, or how certain
“good” gay and lesbian subjects, by aligning themselves
with U.S. imperialism, are welcomed into the nation-state.
Figures associated with Continental feminism who do not necessarily
mark themselves or their work as queer have also been used in queer
theoretical projects, just as feminists have historically done with
any number of non-feminist philosophers. For example, queer studies
scholars have explored the relative absence of Irigaray in queer
theory, argued for the queer resources of her thinking (Huffer 2013;
Winnubst 2006), called attention to the potential use of
Irigaray’s disruption of binaries for queer analyses of identity
(Butler 1993: 36–39; Grosz 1989), and used Irigarayan concepts
to develop queer analyses of longstanding feminist issues, such as the
experience of breast feeding (R. Lee 2018).
Phenomenological methods can also track this traffic between
Continental feminism and queer theory. For example, Sara Ahmed’s
Queer Phenomenology
(2006) explores the use of phenomenology
in queer studies by asking, among other questions, how to understand
the “orientation” of sexual orientation as the way bodies
are directed towards particular objects and away from others. In
developing this queer use of phenomenology, Ahmed acknowledges her
debt to feminist philosophers of the body such as Sandra Bartky, Iris
Marion Young, Rosalyn Diprose, and Gail Weiss, as well as early
phenomenologists such as de Beauvoir and phenomenologists of race
including Linda Alcoff, Frantz Fanon, and Lewis Gordon.
Given these examples of the overlap of figures and approaches in
Continental feminism and queer theory, it is worth asking what
distinguishes the approaches. One may be tempted to say that feminism
focuses more on gender (historically, within continental feminism,
this may be more commonly discussed as sexual difference) and queer
theory focuses more on sexuality (including questions of pleasure,
desire, and eroticism). Yet many working within Continental feminism,
especially as inflected with French theory, also focus on questions
related to sexuality such as pleasure, desire, and eroticism. And
there are also reasons to be suspicious of how the gender-sexuality
split is narrated as a feminist-queer split. While some have argued
that there are good reasons to draw distinctions between these fields
in order to do justice to their distinct concerns (G. Rubin 2011;
Halley 2006), there have also been many challenges to overly
programmatic forms of this separation (Huffer 2013) and accounts of
how this narrative can overlook the field’s mutual interest in
understanding the complex relationship between gender and sexuality,
as well as the possibility of a queer feminism (Jagose 2009).
Nevertheless, despite the overlaps in figures and archives, as well as
the wealth of resources in queer theory on topics that Continental
feminist philosophers hold dear (temporality, embodiment, identity,
and desire, to name only a few), the relatively slow uptake of texts
marked explicitly as queer theory has been noticeable (Winnubst 2010).
This is not to erase the important work done at the intersections of
these fields but to acknowledge that the relationship is not a
seamless one. In their introductory comments to a “Roundtable on
Continental Feminism”, Lynne Huffer and Shannon Winnubst (2017)
note the relative lack of engagement with queer theory among the
contributions, and they ask whether Continental feminism is capacious
enough to embrace queer theory, a question that has also been posed to
philosophy more broadly (Ahmed 2016b; Salamon 2009; Winnubst
2010).
Finally, both Continental feminism and queer theory have also been
extensively critiqued for the whiteness and Anglo-Eurocentric nature
of their archives. In one particularly well-known rendition of this
critique, Cathy Cohen asks whether queer theory has lived up to its
anti-identitarian promise of creating coalitions across difference
(2005). As a way to intervene in the whiteness of queer theory
(Johnson and Henderson 2005), Roderick Ferguson (2004) coined the
term “queer of color critique” to describe how various
intersections of race, gender, sexuality, and class operate in
nationalistic discourses of identity and belonging; it is, in
Ferguson’s words,
a heterogenous enterprise made up of women of color feminism,
materialist analysis, poststructuralist theory, and queer critique.
(Ferguson 2004: 149)
Other notable and early contributors to this sub-field include
José Muñoz, E. Patrick Johnson, Chandan Reddy, and
Gayatri Gopinath. Although the topics at work in queer of color
critique concerning identity, embodiment, temporality, and affect have
also been topics of central interests to Continental feminists, the
uptake of queer of color critique, as with queer theory, has been slow
in Continental feminism. However, as Continental feminism
expands—as shown through this entry— the resources of
queer theory and queer of color critique are waiting in the wings as
crucial, if at times under acknowledged, interlocutors.
Like Continental feminism, queer theory and queer of color critique
continue the longstanding feminist tradition of sending texts and
ideas in directions they were perhaps never intended to travel. Recent
trajectories at the crossroads of Continental feminism and queer
studies include attention to neoliberal capitalism (Winnubst 2015;
McWhorter 2012), sex and gender in ancient Greek metaphysics (Bianchi
2014); critical disability theory (Puar 2017; K. Hall 2014; Yergeau
2018; and Gallop 2019), Latina feminism and existential phenomenology
(Ortega 2016), affect and temporality (Ahmed 2019; Amin 2017; Freeman
2019), and materialism and concepts of agency (Chen 2012). As explored
in the next section, another important interlocutor with both
Continental feminism and queer theory is transgender studies.
5. Continental Feminism and Trans Studies
A number of scholars have noted the complex interplay of shared and
distinct concerns between trans, feminist, and queer frameworks
(Namaste 1996 and 2009; Prosser 1998; Heyes 2003; Salamon 2010a;
Stryker 2004). Emerging in the 1990s as a distinct field of academic
inquiry, trans studies shares many of the intellectual roots of queer
theory yet also departs from queer studies through its explicit focus
on trans experience, including both non-monolithic nature of that
experience and the importance of trans people speaking for themselves
about their own lives. Likewise, while many of the theoretical
frameworks and figures at the heart of Continental feminism are
present in trans studies (e.g., post-structuralism, phenomenology,
Foucauldian genealogy, materialism), there have also been important
critiques of how Continental feminist approaches can ignore or
sideline trans experience. Significantly, many of the philosophers
working in Continental feminism and trans studies cited in this entry
cross inter- and intra-disciplinary boundaries.
In exploring the relationship between Continental feminist and trans
studies, it is crucial to acknowledge the forms that transphobia and
trans-exclusionary gestures can assume in feminist discourse more
generally. For an extended overview of this history, see the entry on
feminist perspectives on trans issues
.
 The entry explains points of terminology (trans, transgender, trans*,
transsexual), as well as the historical emergence of transgender
studies and the broader (i.e., non-Continental specific) relationship
between feminist and trans issues.
In one widely recognized form of feminist transphobia (found in the
work of trans-exclusionary radical feminists such as Janice Raymond),
trans women are portrayed as not “real” women and as
threats to feminist movements (Bettcher 2006, 2007; McKinnon 2018).
However, there is another strand of feminist theory that has a
distinct relationship to trans issues, and (importantly for present
purposes) it is a lineage of feminism that draws heavily on
Continental figures such as Butler. While there is no doubt that
Butler’s work has been foundational in trans studies as well as
in queer theory (Gerdes 2014; Salah 2007), it is also the case that
her work has been critiqued for its selective use of trans experience
(Prosser 1998; Namaste 1996; H. Rubin 1998). Critics point out that
trans identity tends be affirmed in Butlerian queer feminist discourse
when it can be used to demonstrate the actual constructedness of
gender, or its lack of ontological necessity, but also that some trans
identity is portrayed as problematically essentialist when accompanied
by claims to “really be” a man or a woman and/or demands
for medical transition (Valentine 2012). While Prosser and Rubin both
critique this rejection of claims to gender realness from a
phenomenological perspective (and Prosser (1998) from a psychoanalytic
framework as well), Namaste (1996) focuses on the institutional
reality of gender that is often sidelined in these debates. In
response, Jack Halberstam has argued that, while Prosser’s
frustration with a selective use of trans identity in queer and
feminist theory is understandable, there are still significant
problems with the normativity inherent in the idea of gendered
realness (2005).
Notably, the proliferation of non-trans feminist writers working on
trans issues in the 1990s led to Jacob Hale’s “Suggested
Rules for Non-Transsexuals Writing about Transsexuals, Transsexuality,
Transsexualism, or Trans” (1997
 [
Other Internet Resources
]).
 Significant non-trans feminist analyses, following Hale and the
emergence of transgender studies, include work by Cressida Heyes
(2003) and Naomi Scheman (1996, 2016), both of whom articulate
theoretical bases for solidarity between cis and trans feminists.
There are also important instances of cis feminist theorists bringing
trans issues directly into their own work as serious interlocutors,
rather than as thought experiments (Ahmed 2016b; Colebrook 2015;
Shotwell & Sangrey 2008) and collaborating with trans theorists
(Heyes & Latham 2018). The term “cis” itself has also
received more scholarly attention in the last two decades (Aultman
2014). While the original intention behind the term was to
denaturalize non-trans subject positions, not all scholars agree that
the term successfully destabilizes gender norms, particularly insofar
as such norms are racialized (Enke 2012b).
More recently, there have been many new trajectories established at
the crossroads of Continental and trans approaches to gender. A number
of philosophers have written at the intersections of phenomenology and
trans studies, particularly in critical phenomenology, which
emphasizes questions of oppression and power in examining how things
appear to us in the world (Weiss, Murphy, & Salamon 2020). Ephraim
Das Janssen uses phenomenology, including the work of Martin
Heidegger, to examine what transgender experience tells us about
gender (2017). Megan Burke (2019) takes up Beauvoirian concepts to
explore androgyny, trans identity, and agender experience. Gayle
Salamon draws on the work of Maurice Merleau-Ponty to develop a
phenomenology of transphobia in
The Life and Death of Latisha
King
(2018a). Salamon merges a tradition of earlier work in
phenomenology and trans studies (H. Rubin 1998; Prosser 1998) with
critical phenomenology. Tamsin Kimoto (2018) has also used both
Merleau-Ponty and Frantz Fanon to explore hormonal transition and
transphobia.
Along similar lines, new work in psychoanalysis and trans studies is
also revising longstanding psychoanalytic approaches to sex and
gender, including coercive and pathologizing theories of trans
subjectivity (Elliot 2014), and is using resources in psychoanalysis
to theorize trans experiences from a less pathologizing perspective
(Breslow 2017; Carlson 2010; Coffman 2017; Cavanagh 2010). For
example, Amy Ray Stewart uses Julia Kristeva’s concept of
“intimate revolt” to illuminate trans and queer
experiences of psychic life (2017). Patricia Gherovici (2017) has
written about trans phenomena and the need to revise psychoanalytic
concepts using Lacanian theory and her own clinical experience working
with trans people. Relying on both psychoanalytic and phenomenological
frameworks, Salamon (2010a) has also defended Butler’s account
of gender against the aforementioned critiques of its treatment of
trans experience and developed her own psychoanalytic and
phenomenological account of a dissonance between a felt sense of
gender and an external appearance of a body that is attuned to trans
experience.
There is also a body of work emerging that puts foundational figures
in Continental feminism into conversation with trans studies. Marie
Draz (2018) has placed feminist philosophical uses of Nietzsche, such
as in the work of Butler (1990) and Rosalyn Diprose (2002), into
conversation with trans scholarship on the institutionalization of
gender categories, while Tim Johnston (2015) has argued that although
scholars of gender and sexuality have used Irigarayan resources for
discussing trans and queer issues, Irigaray’s own claim that
ontology is sexed and that there is an impassable limit between the
sexes conveys an unsalvageable cissexism, or privileging of non-trans
experience. In a similar vein, Oli Stephano (2019) critiques Elizabeth
Grosz’s emphasis on the irreducibility of sexual difference,
showing that her ontology invalidates trans embodiment and
subjectivities. This critique of Grosz follows earlier work by Eva
Hayward (2017) on the transphobic implications of some of
Grosz’s feminist materialist arguments. Gayle Salamon also
critically examines the way that sexual difference operates as a limit
to the reimagining of embodiment and materiality in the work of both
Irigaray and Grosz (Salamon 2010a). María Lugones is another
figure of widespread use in Continental feminism who has been
regularly cited in scholarship on trans issues (Bettcher 2014b;
DiPietro 2019; Draz 2017a; Malatino 2019). Finally, like Butler, the
use of Foucault in trans studies has also changed dramatically over
the last several decades. For example, Foucault’s work on types
of modern power has been used (alongside women of color feminism,
indigenous scholarship, and numerous other sources) to examine the
violence caused by how state institutions administer legal gender
categories in sex-segregated institutions and identity documents
(Spade 2011 [2015]). Foucauldian feminist accounts of prison and
punishment have also been put into conversation with scholarship
rooted in trans and gender non-conforming experience (Dilts 2017;
Vitulli 2018; Zurn 2016, 2019).
Trans studies continues, in different veins, many of the foundational
questions of Continental feminism by bringing the tools of Continental
philosophy to bear on questions of sex, gender, and sexuality, and
vice versa, and it continually orients these conversations in new
directions. Much of this work is informed by other areas of critical
theory (e.g., critical race theory and decolonial theory) and pushes
the traditional boundaries of Continental feminism. Recent scholarship
on blackness and trans history, for example, has articulated the
importance of developing frameworks capable of understanding the
dimensions of racialized gender historically and today (Snorton 2017)
and work on migration and Latinx trans people has highlighted the need
to attend to both the limits of our political theory and the
productive capacities of trans people of color for generating new
worlds (Pitts 2018). Current conversations about the relationship
between Continental feminism and trans studies must also involve
attention to the material conditions of the academy itself, as the
growing attention to trans experience in philosophy more broadly has
not resulted in more trans voices and trans academics (Bettcher 2018
(Other Internet Resources); Marvin 2019, 2020). Future directions in
Continental feminism and trans studies will need to be attentive not
only to the intriguing philosophical questions occurring in these
conversations, but also to the specific contours of the material
conditions that allow trans scholarship to flourish.
6. Continental Feminism and Asian American Feminist Thought
This section explores the relationship between Continental feminism
and Asian American feminist thought, both the tensions between the two
as well as new directions that this relation brings to Continental
feminism. A major point of convergence between the two fields is the
focus on lived experience of Asian American women. This section begins
by discussing the hypervisibility that Asian American women experience
due to the specific forms of oppression that they face, namely,
orientalization and the Model Minority myth. It then highlights the
paradoxical form of invisibility that Asian American feminist
phenomenologist trace in their body of work. Next, this section
considers the historical position of Asian American women in
coalitional feminist projects, especially focusing on the ways in
which Asian American women have been relegated to a
“tag-along” group. Finally, this section will highlight
recent scholarship in Continental feminism that engages with Asian
American feminist theory and draws upon both Eastern and Western
traditions.
It must be noted from the outset that “Asian” is an
exceptionally broad term, and the peoples that are considered
Asian/Asian American have often changed throughout history. In
accordance with anthologies by Asian American women that respond to
this very issue, this section addresses the identities of women who
trace their roots back to East Asia, Southeast Asia, and the Indian
subcontinent (Asian Women United of California 1989; The Women of
South Asian Descent Collective 1993).
In
This Bridge Called My Back
(Moraga & Anzaldúa
1981 [2015]), Asian American thinkers such as Genny Lim, Merle Woo, Nellie
Wong, and Mitsuye Yamada established their positions in feminist
theorizing by exploring their own perspectives on topics surrounding
gendered identity, sexuality, silencing, the feeling of not-belonging,
and living against stereotypes of Asian American women as docile,
quiet, agreeable, and submissive. Similarly, in
This Bridge We
Call Home
(Anzaldúa & Keating 2002), Minh-ha T. Pham,
Shirley Geok-Lin Lim, and Jid Lee theorize from the specific
experiences that they face as Asian American immigrant women, such as
exploring a connection to an Asian mother who emigrated to the United
States, navigating the cultural connection they still hold to a land
that they may have never visited, and living in the face of the Model
Minority myth while also subverting the stereotype. Writings that
center the perspective of the Asian American and diasporic Asian woman
are essential for Asian American feminist theorizing, for, as Sonia
Shah emphasized,
[a]n Asian American feminist movement is
the only movement
that will consistently represent Asian American women’s
interests. (1998: xix)
Two early anthologies were very important for the formation of Asian
American feminism:
Making Waves
(Asian Women United of
California [AWUC] 1989) and
The Forbidden Stitch
(Lim &
Tsutakawa 1989); they both include writings from different ethnic and
national backgrounds, specifically Chinese, Japanese, Filipino,
Korean, Vietnamese, and Indian (Hill-Collins & Bilge 2016: 73). In
a recent volume entitled
Asian American Feminisms and Women of
Color Politics
, editors Lynn Fujiwara and Shireen Roshanravan
present a series of articles emerging at the intersection of Asian
American feminist engagement with Women of Color coalition politics,
organizing around concepts, methods, and epistemic principles central
to Women of Color feminist scholarship (Fujiwara & Roshanravan
2018)
Hypervisibility of Asian American women is a central issue in most
Asian American feminist projects. Some Asian American feminist
theorists, such as Robin Zheng, argue that Asian American women are
hypervisible because they are hypersexualized, orientalized, and
exoticized. Robin Zheng (2016) discusses the complexities of
hypervisibility “Why Yellow Fever Isn’t Flattering: A Case
Against Racial Fetishes”. Zheng argues that there is little
difference between what is known as “yellow fever”, the
racial fetishization and preference of Asian women and men, and what
she calls the “Mere Preference Argument”, which attempts
to claim that there is nothing morally wrong with preferring certain
racialized phenotypic traits; as she shows, despite the origin of a
racialized fetish, both yellow fever and other racialized fetishes
“depersonalize and otherize” their subjects (2016: 412).
Zheng shows that these fetishes are not just harmless personal
preferences, but a set of practices and thought patterns that result
in negative social impacts for Asian American women. Relatedly, Asian
American women are also hypervisible due to the “Model Minority
myth”, that is, the myth that asserts that Asian Americans are
uniquely hard-working and thus, the ideal “model”
minority, especially in contrast with other minority groups. This myth
makes Asian American women hypervisible by making them a part of a
group of people who are defined by their ability to achieve upward
class mobility (K. Lee 2014).
Paradoxically, Asian American women are also rendered invisible in
various feminist movements and discourses. Asian American feminist
discussions on invisibility differ from other discussions within
Continental feminism on visibility and feminine erasure due to their
dual existence as both invisible subjects and hypervisible
representations of stereotypes. Poet and activist Mitsuye Yamada
states that Asian American women are “the visible minority that
is invisible” (1981b). Yamada means this claim in two ways:
first, in regard to how Asian American women are rendered invisible in
conversations surrounding women of color oppressions; and second, in
regard to how the oppressions experienced by Asian American women are
often invisible to themselves. In order to carve out a space for
themselves in feminist theorizing, Asian American women in this book
shared their stories that demonstrate the struggle of becoming visible
to oneself while existing in a world that constantly demands
one’s invisibility. Yamada’s explains how she was
invisible to herself because she practiced passive resistance while
believing that others did not see her as the stereotype of an Asian
American women. In order to become visible to herself and others, she
realized that she must act in ways, such as displaying anger in
response to sexist and racist acts, that an oppressive gaze would
claim was “uncharacteristic” of her as an Asian American
woman (1981b: 40). At the same time, the Model Minority myth can also
paradoxically render Asian American women invisible by making them
hypervisible as successful paradigms that are perceived as lacking
experiences of oppression and violence and thus have no credibility to
speak to these lived experiences.
As a result of this specific form of invisibility, Asian American
feminists proposed new methods of political organization in order to
include the voices of Asian American women in feminist coalitions. The
similarities between writings that span nearly two decades gesture to
one of the many issues faced by Asian American feminism: Asian
American feminists have often been seen, and arguably still are seen,
as a group in the background that is simply, as Yamada described,
“tagging along” in feminist theorization against
oppressions (1981b: 40). In other words, Asian American women are
often seen as individuals who do not often experience oppressions that
are specific to their own identities and, therefore, have no place in
fighting oppression. In response to this, we can see activists such as
Grace Lee Boggs, who have worked closely with other people of color in
the fight against different oppressions (Boggs & Boggs 1974; 1998
[2016]; Boggs & Kurashige 2011); Lisa Lowe’s essay on
heterogeneity, hybridity, and multipolicy of Asian American
women’s experiences (Lowe 1991); and more recent Asian American
feminist projects that include Asian Americans women in liberatory
projects in a manner that does not simply relegate them to tag-along
positions (Shah 1998; Fujiwara & Roshanravan, 2018).
A growing number of recent works in Asian American feminism engage
with figures and themes in Continental feminism through the framework
Eastern philosophy and the Asian American women’s perspective
and as such they provide new directions for a genuinely
transContinental feminism. For example, building on the discussions
concerning gender in Continental feminisms, thinkers such as Kyoo Lee
(2014) and Robin Wang (2016) have explored different ways that the
gendered body has been discussed. Engaging with the concept of the
“dark female animal” (
xuapin
) in
Daodejing
, Kyoo Lee explores the revolutionary potential of
xuapin
, which she claims possesses a gender-bending power.
Lee argues that
xuapin
demonstrates
in a sense, superiority of femaleness and femininity –as
the
norm, albeit invisible and inaudible
and that it is
gender-bending: female and not female at once, heterosexualized and
not at once. (K. Lee 2014: 59)
Wang investigates yin-yang gender dynamics through a variety of both
Eastern and Western sources in order to answer whether yin-yang gender
construction allows for gender equality. Alluding to Continental
feminists who wrote on gender such as Simone de Beauvoir, Judith
Butler, and Luce Irigaray, Wang discusses an exploration of gender
through a Chinese framework (the yin-yang) that does not make a clear
distinction between sex and gender. Wang argues that yin-yang gender
construction offers a dynamic and fluid description of gender
relationships (Wang 2016: 224).
7. Conclusion and New Directions in Continental Feminism
This entry has listed a number of ways in which Continental approaches
and figures are used to address feminist issues; we have attempted
both to describe some of the ongoing research areas in Continental
feminism and to point out new directions it has been taking over the
past decades. However, this list remains incomplete as we have been
unable to account for all of the important work underway. A more
complete entry would need to include projects on the intersection
between Continental feminism and critical disability studies,
indigenous feminisms, and new materialisms and humanisms. Furthermore,
we do not mean to suggest that there is no overlap or intersection
between the topics or figures grouped under each section heading here.
Lastly, there is certainly ongoing work of which we are not aware that
is already making an impact on the present and future of feminist
scholarship. We thus conclude here not with a summative statement
defining Continental feminism but rather by reflecting on the material
conditions of Continental feminism.
When Linda Martín Alcoff addressed the Eastern American
Philosophical Association in 2012, she reflected on the tension and
issues within disciplinary philosophy and urged philosophers to
“apply our diagnostic impulses to ourselves” (Alcoff 2013:
43). A necessary aspect of such praxis for Continental feminists in
light of the genealogies considered here is exemplified by Audre Lorde
who, speaking on the “Personal is Political Panel” at the
Second Sex Conference in 1979, stated
I urge each one of us here to reach down into that deep place of
knowledge inside herself and touch that terror and loathing of any
difference that lives there. See whose face it wears. (Lorde 1984a:
101)
Lorde calls feminists to enact a humble and frank confrontation with
their own embodied lives and senses of self in the context of each
person’s differential implication in racist, sexist,
heterosexist, classist and ableist power. Rather than imagining that
one puts on one’s thinking hat and reflects “as a
theorist” and then take it off and acts “as a regular
person”, Continental feminisms suggest that the subject who
theorizes is themself always an embodied subject: Kris Sealey reminds
us that “Continental methods oftentimes refract differently
across race and gender axes” and that for this reason,
Continental feminists ought “to be intentional about the
relationship they occupy, quite simultaneously, to racial and gender
liberation” (Sealey 2017: 166). As this entry has shown, the
diversity of Continental feminist thought has been developed through
the thoughtful negotiation of many different struggles. For the
imagined community of Continental feminism to continue to grow and
support these projects, space must continually be made for new
practitioners. Since, as we put above, Continental feminism is less
concerned with changing a woman’s place in a symbolic or social
system, and more on upending that system itself, members of this
academic community must continue to do the work that will make it
possible to learn from each other. Only in this way Continental
feminism can be opened up fully to its interdisciplinary
potential.
Bibliography
Abel, Elizabeth, Barbara Christian, and Helene Moglen (eds.),
1997,
Female Subjects in Black and White: Race, Psychoanalysis,
Feminism
, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Ahmed, Sara, 2004 [2014],
The Cultural Politics of
Emotion
, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press; second edition,
2014.
–––, 2006,
Queer Phenomenology:
Orientations, Objects, Others
, Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
–––, 2010,
The Promise of Happiness
,
Durham, NC: Duke University Press Books.
–––, 2016a, “An Affinity of
Hammers”,
TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly
,
3(1–2): 22–34. doi:10.1215/23289252-3334151
–––, 2016b, “Interview with Judith
Butler”,
Sexualities
, 19(4): 482–492.
doi:10.1177/1363460716629607
–––, 2017,
Living a Feminist Life
,
Durham, NC: Duke University Press Books.
–––, 2019,
What’s the Use? On the Uses
of Use
, Durham: Duke University Press.
Aizura, Aren Z., Trystan Cotten, Carsten Balzer/Carla LaGata,
Marcia Ochoa, and Salvador Vidal-Ortiz, 2014,
“Introduction”, to
Decolonizing the Transgender
Imaginary
special issue of
TSQ: Transgender Studies
Quarterly
, 1(3): 308–319. doi:10.1215/23289252-2685606
Al-Saji, Alia, 2010, “The Racialization of Muslim Veils: A
Philosophical Analysis”,
Philosophy & Social
Criticism
, 36(8): 875–902.
doi:10.1177/0191453710375589
–––, 2014, “A Phenomenology of Hesitation:
Interrupting Racializing Habits of Seeing”, in E. Lee 2014:
133–172.
–––, 2017, “Feminist Phenomenology”,
in Garry, Khader, and Stone 2017: 143–154 (ch. 12).
–––, 2018, “Material Life: Bergsonian
tendencies in Simone de Beauvoir’s philosophy”, in
Differences: Rereading Beauvoir and Irigaray
, Emily Anne
Parker and Anne van Leeuwen (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press,
pp. 21–53.
Alcoff, Linda Martín, 1991, “The Problem of Speaking
for Others”,
Cultural Critique
, 20: 5–32.
doi:10.2307/1354221
–––, 2000, “Merleau-Ponty and Feminist
Theory on Experience”, in
Chiasms: Merleau-Ponty’s
Notion of Flesh
, Fred Evans and Leonard Lawlor (eds.), Albany, NY:
SUNY Press, pp. 251–271.
–––, 1999, “On Judging Epistemic
Credibility: Is Social Identity Relevant?”
Philosophic
Exchange
, 29(1) Article 1. 
 [
Alcoff 1999 available online
]
–––, 2006,
Visible Identities: Race, Gender
and the Self
, New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0195137345.001.0001
–––, 2013, “Philosophy’s Civil
Wars”,
Proceedings and Addresses of the American
Philosophical Association
, 87: 16–43.
–––, 2015,
The Future of Whiteness
,
Cambridge: Polity.
Alexander, M. Jacqui and Chandra Talpade Mohanty (eds.), 1996,
Feminist Genealogies, Colonial Legacies, Democratic Futures
,
New York: Routledge.
Amin, Kadji, 2017,
Disturbing Attachments: Genet, Modern
Pederasty, and Queer History
, Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
Anzaldúa, Gloria, 1987,
Borderlands/la frontera: The
New Mestiza
, San Francisco, CA: Spinsters/Aunt Lute.
–––, 1991 [2009], “To(o) Queer the Writer:
Loca, escritoria y chicana”, in
InVersions: Writing by
Dykes, Queers, and Lesbians
, Betsy Warland (ed.), Vancouver, BC:
Press Gang Publishers, 249–264; reprinted in
The Gloria
Anzaldúa Reader
, Ana-Louise Keating (ed.), Durham, NC:
Duke University Press, 2009: 163–175.
Anzaldúa, Gloria and AnaLouise Keating (eds.), 2002,
This Bridge We Call Home: Radical Visions for Transformation
,
New York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203952962
Arendt, Hannah, 1963,
Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the
Banality of Evil
, New York: Viking Press.
Asian Women United of California (ed.), 1989,
Making Waves: An
Anthology of Writings by and about Asian American Women
, Boston:
Beacon Press.
Aultman, B., 2014, “Cisgender”,
TSQ: Transgender
Studies Quarterly
, 1(1–2): 61–62.
doi:10.1215/23289252-2399614
Barker, Meg-John and Julia Scheele, 2016,
Queer: A Graphic
History
, London: Icon Books.
Bartky, Sandra Lee, 1990, “Foucault, Femininity, and the
Modernization of Patriarchal Power”, in her
Femininity and
Domination: Studies in the Phenomenology of Oppression
, New York:
Routledge, 63–82.
Beauvoir, Simone, 1947 [1976],
Pour une morale de
l’ambigüité
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
Ethics of Ambiguity
, Bernard Frechtman (trans.), New York:
Citadel Press, 1976.
–––, 1949 [1953],
Le Deuxième
sexe
, Paris: Editions Gallimard. Translated as
The Second
Sex
, H. M. Pashley (trans.), New York: Knopf, 1953.
Belle, Kathryn Sophia (Kathryn T. Gines before 2014/2017), 2003,
“Fanon and Sartre 50 Years Later – To Retain or Reject the
Concept of Race”,
Sartre Studies International
, 9(2):
55–67. doi:10.3167/135715503781800213
–––, 2011, “‘The Man Who Lived
Underground’: Jean-Paul Sartre And the Philosophical Legacy of
Richard Wright”,
Sartre Studies International
, 17(2):
42–59. doi:10.3167/ssi.2011.170204
–––, 2012, “Reflections on the Legacy and
Future of the Continental Tradition with Regard to the Critical
Philosophy of Race: Critical Philosophy of Race”,
The
Southern Journal of Philosophy
, 50(2): 329–344.
doi:10.1111/j.2041-6962.2012.00109.x
–––, 2014,
Hannah Arendt and the Negro
Question
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Benhabib, Seyla, 1986,
Critique, Norm, and Utopia: A Study of
the Foundations of Critical Theory
, New York: Columbia University
Press.
Benhabib, Seyla and Drucilla Cornell (eds.), 1987,
Feminism as
Critique: On the Politics of Gender
, Minneapolis, MN: University
of Minnesota Press.
Benhabib, Seyla, Judith Butler, Drucilla Cornell, and Nancy
Fraser, 1995,
Feminist Contentions: A Philosophical Exchange
,
New York: Routledge.
Berlant, Lauren, 2008,
The Female Complaint: The Unfinished
Business of Sentimentality in American Culture
, Durham, NC: Duke
University Press.
Berruz, Stephanie Rivera, 2016, “At the Crossroads: Latina
Identity and Simone de Beauvoir’s
The Second
Sex
”,
Hypatia
, 31(2): 319–333.
doi:10.1111/hypa.12226
–––, 2018, “Latin American
Feminism”, in
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2018 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2018/entries/feminism-latin-america/
>
Bettcher, Talia Mae, 2006, “Appearance, Reality, and Gender
Deception: Reflections on Transphobic Violence and the Politics of
Pretence”, in Felix Murchadha (ed.),
Violence, Victims, and
Justifications
, New York: Peter Lang Press, pp.
174–200.
–––, 2007, “Evil Deceivers and
Make-Believers: On Transphobic Violence and the Politics of
Illusion”,
Hypatia
, 22(3): 43–65.
doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2007.tb01090.x
–––, 2014a, “When Selves Have Sex: What
the Phenomenology of Trans Sexuality Can Teach About Sexual
Orientation”,
Journal of Homosexuality
, 61(5):
605–620. doi:10.1080/00918369.2014.865472
–––, 2014b, “Trapped in the Wrong Theory:
Rethinking Trans Oppression and Resistance”,
Signs: Journal
of Women in Culture and Society
, 39(2): 383–406.
doi:10.1086/673088
Bettcher, Talia Mae and Ann Garry (eds.), 2009,
Transgender
Studies and Feminism: Theory, Politics, and Gender Realities
(special issue) of
Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy
,
24(3).
Bianchi, Emanuela, 2014,
The Feminine Symptom: Aleatory Matter
in the Aristotelian Cosmos
, New York: Fordham University
Press.
Billingsley, Amy, 2015a, “Technology and Narratives of
Continuity in Transgender Experiences”,
Feminist Philosophy
Quarterly
, 1(1): art. 6. doi:10.5206/fpq/2015.1.6
–––, 2015b, “Hope in a Vice: Carole
Pateman, Judith Butler, and Suspicious Hope”,
Hypatia
,
30(3): 597–612. doi:10.1111/hypa.12156
Bloodsworth, Mary K., 1999, “Embodiment and Ambiguity: Luce
Irigaray, Sexual Difference, and ‘Race’”,
International Studies in Philosophy
, 31(2): 69–90.
doi:10.5840/intstudphil199931216
Boggs, Grace Lee, 1998 [2016],
Living for Change: An
Autobiography
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.
Boggs, Grace Lee and Scott Kurashige, 2011,
The Next American
Revolution: Sustainable Activism for the Twenty-First Century
,
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press; second edition,
2012.
Boggs, James and Grace Lee Boggs, 1974,
Revolution and
Evolution in the Twentieth Century
, New York: Monthly Review
Press.
Bordo, Susan, 1993,
Unbearable Weight: Feminism, Western
Culture, and the Body
, Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
Bow, Leslie, 2001,
Betrayal and Other Acts of Subversion:
Feminism, Sexual Politics, Asian American Women’s
Literature
, Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press.
–––, 2010,
Partly Colored: Asian Americans
and Racial Anomaly in the Segregated South
, New York: New York
University Press.
Bradley, Rizvana (ed.), 2014,
The Haptic: Textures of
Performance
, special issue of
Women and Performance: A
Journal of Feminist Theory
, 24(2–3).
–––, 2018, “Ways of the Flesh: Barbara
Hammer’s Vertical Worlds”,
Barbara Hammer: Evidentiary
Bodies
, Staci Bu Shea and Carmel Curtis (eds.), Munich:
Hirmer.
Brennan, Teresa, 1992,
The Interpretation of the Flesh: Freud
and Femininity
, London: Routledge.
–––, 2004,
The Transmission of Affect
,
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Breslow, Jacob, 2017, “‘There Is Nothing Missing in
the Real’”,
TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly
,
4(3–4): 431–450. doi:10.1215/23289252-4189910
Brooks, Kinitra D., 2018,
Searching for Sycorax: Black
Women’s Hauntings of Contemporary Horror
, New Brunswick,
NJ: Rutgers University Press.
Brown, Wendy, 2015,
Undoing the Demos: Neoliberalism’s
Stealth Revolution
, Brooklyn, NY: Zone Books.
Burke, Megan M., 2019, “Beauvoirian Androgyny: Reflections
on the Androgynous World of Fraternité in
The Second
Sex
”,
Feminist Theory
, 20(1): 3–18.
doi:10.1177/1464700118754751
Butler, Judith, 1990,
Gender Trouble: Feminism and the
Subversion of Identity
, New York: Routledge.
–––, 1991, “Imitation and Gender
Insubordination”, in
Inside/Out: Lesbian Theories, Gay
Theories
, Diana Fuss (ed.), New York: Routledge, pp.
13–31.
–––, 1993,
Bodies that Matter: On the
Discursive Limits of “Sex”
, New York: Routledge.
–––, 1997,
The Psychic Life of Power:
Theories of Subjection
, Stanford, CA: Stanford University
Press.
–––, 2004,
Undoing Gender
, New York:
Routledge.
–––, 2005,
Giving an Account of
Oneself
, New York: Fordham University Press,.
–––, 2009 [2016],
Frames of War: When Is
Life Grievable?
London; New York: Verso; reprinted
2016.
–––, 2019, “Gender in Translation: Beyond
Monolingualism”,
philoSOPHIA: a Journal of transContinental
Feminism
, 9(1): 1–25. doi:10.1353/phi.2019.0011
Carlson, Shanna T., 2010, “Transgender Subjectivity and the
Logic of Sexual Difference”,
differences
, 21(2):
46–72. doi:10.1215/10407391-2010-003
Cavanagh, Sheila L., 2010,
Queering Bathrooms: Gender,
Sexuality, and the Hygienic Imagination
, Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.
Césaire, Aimé, 2017,
The Complete Poetry of
Aimé Cesaire: Bilingual Edition
, Clayton Eshleman and A.
James Arnold (trans.), Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.
–––, 1950/1955 [1972],
Discours sur le
colonialisme
, Paris: Éditions Réclame; revised
edition, Paris: Présence africaine, 1955. Translated as
Discourse on Colonialism
, Joan Pinkham (trans.), New York:
Monthly Review Press, 1972.
Chanter, Tina, 1995,
Ethics of Eros: Irigaray’s
Rewriting of the Philosophers
, New York: Routledge.
–––, 2008,
The Picture of Abjection: Film,
Fetish, and the Nature of Difference
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
–––, 2011,
Whose Antigone?: The Tragic
Marginalization of Slavery
, Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Chen, Mel Y., 2012,
Animacies: Biopolitics, Racial Mattering,
and Queer Affect
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Christian, Barbara, 1988, “The Race for Theory”,
Feminist Studies
, 14(1): 67–79.
Cixous, Hélène, 1975 [1976], “Le Rire de la
Méduse”,
L’Arc
, 61: 39–54. Revised
and translated as, 1976, “The Laugh of Medusa”, Keith
Cohen and Paula Cohen (trans),
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture
and Society
, 1(4): 875–893.
Code, Lorraine, 2007, “The Power of Ignorance”, in S.
Sullivan and Tuana 2007: 213–230.
Coffman, Chris, 2017, “Žižek’s Antagonism and the
Futures of Trans-Affirmative Lacanian Psychoanalysis”,
TSQ:
Transgender Studies Quarterly
, 4(3–4): 472–496.
doi:10.1215/23289252-4189929
Cohen, Cathy, 2005, “Punks, Bulldaggers, and Welfare Queens:
The Radical Potential of Queer Politics?” in E. P. Johnson and
Henderson 2005: 21–51.
Cole, Alyson and Kyoo Lee, 2019, “Editors’
Introduction: A TransContinental Turn”,
philoSOPHIA
,
9(1): iii–vi. doi:10.1353/phi.2019.0010
Colebrook, Claire, 2000, “From Radical Representations to
Corporeal Becomings: The Feminist Philosophy of Lloyd, Grosz, and
Gatens”,
Hypatia
, 15(2): 76–93.
doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2000.tb00315.x
–––, 2015, “What Is It Like to Be a
Human?”,
TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly
, 2(2):
227–243. doi:10.1215/23289252-2867472
Connell, Raewyn, 2012, “Transsexual Women and Feminist
Thought: Toward New Understanding and New Politics”,
Signs:
Journal of Women in Culture and Society
, 37(4): 857–881.
doi:10.1086/664478
Coole, Diana, and Samantha Frost (eds.), 2010,
New
Materialisms: Ontology, Agency, and Politics
, Durham, NC: Duke
University Press Books.
Cooper, Anna Julia, 1892 [1988],
A Voice from the South
,
Xenia, Ohio: Aldine Printing House; reprinted New York: Oxford
University Press, 1988.
Cooper, Brittney C., 2017,
Beyond Respectability: The
Intellectual Thought of Race Women
, Champaign, IL: University of
Illinois Press.
Cornell, Drucilla, 1993,
Transformations: Recollective
Imagination and Sexual Difference
, New York: Routledge.
–––, 1995,
The Imaginary Domain: Abortion,
Pornography, and Sexual Harassment
, New York : Routledge.
–––, 1998,
At the Heart of Freedom:
Feminism, Sex, and Equality
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
–––, 2002,
Between Women and Generations:
Legacies of Dignity
, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Cornell, Drucilla and Kenneth Michael Panfilio, 2010,
Symbolic
Forms for a New Humanity: Cultural and Racial Reconfigurations of
Critical Theory
, New York: Fordham University Press.
Crenshaw, Kimberlé, 1989, “Demarginalizing the
Intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of
Antidiscrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory and Antiracist
Politics”,
University of Chicago Legal Forum
, 1989:
art. 8 (139–167).
 [
Crenshaw 1989 available online
]
–––, 1991, “Mapping the Margins:
Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence against Women of
Color”,
Stanford Law Review
, 43(6): 1241–1299.
doi:10.2307/1229039
Cvetkovich, Ann, 2007, “Public Feelings”,
South
Atlantic Quarterly
, 106(3): 459–468.
doi:10.1215/00382876-2007-004
Dalal, Neil, and Chloë Taylor (eds.), 2014,
Asian
Perspectives on Animal Ethics: Rethinking the Nonhuman
, Abingdon:
Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781315796246
Davis, Angela Y., 1981 [1983],
Women, Race and Class
, New
York: Random House. Second printing, 1983.
–––, 2003,
Are Prisons Obsolete?
New
York: Seven Stories Press.
De Lauretis, Teresa, 1994,
The Practice of Love: Lesbian
Sexuality and Perverse Desire
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Del Guadalupe Davidson, Maria, 2010, “Rethinking Black
Feminist Subjectivity: Ann duCille and Gilles Deleuze”, Del
Guadalupe Davidson, Gines, and Marcano 2010: 121–134.
Del Guadalupe Davidson, Maria, Kathryn T. Gines, and Donna-Dale L.
Marcano (eds.), 2010,
Convergences: Black Feminism and Continental
Philosophy
, Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Deutscher, Penelope, 2003, “Between East and West and the
Politics of ‘Cultural Ingénuité’: Irigaray
on Cultural Difference”,
Theory, Culture & Society
,
20(3): 65–75. doi:10.1177/02632764030203005
–––, 2017,
Foucault’s Futures:
A Critique of Reproductive Reason
, New York: Columbia
University Press.
Dilts, Andrew, 2017, “Toward Abolitionist Genealogy: Toward
Abolitionist Genealogy”,
The Southern Journal of
Philosophy
, 55(S1): 51–77. doi:10.1111/sjp.12237
DiPietro, Pedro J., 2019, “Beyond Benevolent Violence:
Trans* of Color, Ornamental Multiculturalism, and the Decolonization
of Affect”, in
Speaking Face to Face: The Visionary
Philosophy of María Lugones
, Pedro J. DiPietro, Jennifer
McWeeny, and Shireen Roshanravan (eds.), Albany, NY: SUNY Press, pp.
197–216.
Diprose, Rosalyn, 2002,
Corporeal Generosity: On Giving with
Nietzsche, Merleau-Ponty, and Levinas
, Albany, NY: SUNY.
Dotson, Kristie, 2012a, “How Is This Paper
Philosophy?”,
Comparative Philosophy: An International
Journal of Constructive Engagement of Distinct Approaches toward World
Philosophy
, 3(1): art. 5.
doi:10.31979/2151-6014(2012).030105
–––, 2012b, “A Cautionary Tale: On
Limiting Epistemic Oppression”,
Frontiers: A Journal of
Women Studies
, 33(1): 24–47.
doi:10.5250/fronjwomestud.33.1.0024
Draz, Marie, 2013, “The Stakes of the Real: Queer Feminism
and the Challenge of Critical Trans Politics”, in
American
Philosophical Association Newsletter on Philosophy and LGBT
Issues
, 12(2): 8–13.
 [
Draz 2013 available online (pdf)
]
–––, 2017a, “Born This Way? Time and the
Coloniality of Gender”,
The Journal of Speculative
Philosophy
, 31(3): 372–384.
doi:10.5325/jspecphil.31.3.0372
–––, 2017b, “On Gender Neutrality: Derrida
and Transfeminism in Conversation”,
philoSOPHIA
, 7(1):
91–98. doi:10.1353/phi.2017.0006
–––, 2018, “Burning It in? Nietzsche,
Gender, and Externalized Memory”,
Feminist Philosophy
Quarterly
, 4(2): art. 1. doi:10.5206/fpq/2018.2.3479
DuCille, Ann, 1997, “The Occult of True Black Womanhood:
Critical Demeanor and Black Feminist Studies”, in Abel,
Christian and Moglen 1997: 21–56.
Elliot, Patricia, 2014, “Psychoanalysis”,
TSQ:
Transgender Studies Quarterly
, 1(1–2): 165–168.
doi:10.1215/23289252-2399920
Enke, A. Finn, 2012a, “The Education of Little Cis:
Cisgender and the Discipline of Opposing Bodies”, in Enke 2012b:
60–77.
––– (ed.), 2012b,
Transfeminist Perspectives
in and Beyond Transgender and Gender Studies
, Philadelphia, PA:
Temple University Press.
Feder, Ellen K., 2007,
Family Bonds: Genealogies of Race and
Gender
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Felman, Soshana, 2002,
The Juridical Unconscious: Trials and
Traumas in the Twentieth Century
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Ferguson, Roderick A., 2004,
Aberrations in Black: Toward a
Queer of Color Critique
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.
Ferreira da Silva, Denise. 2007,
Toward a Global Idea of
Race
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
–––, 2014, “Toward a Black Feminist
Poethics: The Quest(Ion) of Blackness Toward the End of the
World”,
The Black Scholar
, 44(2): 81–97.
doi:10.1080/00064246.2014.11413690
–––, 2018, “Hacking the Subject: Black
Feminism and Refusal beyond the Limits of Critique”,
philoSOPHIA
, 8(1): 19–41.
doi:10.1353/phi.2018.0001
Foucault, Michel, 1961 [1965],
Folie et déraison.
Histoire de la folie à l’âge classique
, Paris:
Librairie Plon. Translated as
Madness and Civilization: A History
of Insanity in the Age of Reason
, Richard Howard (trans.), New
York: Pantheon Books, 1965.
–––, 1963 [1973],
Naissance de la
clinique
, Paris: Presses universitaires de France. Translated as
The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical
Perception
, A.M. Sheridan (trans.), New York: Pantheon Books,
1973.
–––, 1966 [1970],
Les mots et les
choses
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
The Order of Things:
An Archaeology of the Human Sciences
, New York: Pantheon Books,
1970.
–––, 1969 [1972],
Archéologie du
savoir
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
The Archaeology of
Knowledge and The Discourse on Language
, A. M. Sheridan, New
York: Pantheon Books, 1972.
–––, 1975 [1977],
Surveiller et punir :
naissance de la prison
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison
, London: Allen
Lane, 1977.
–––, 1976 [1978],
Histoire de la
sexualité: La volonté de savoir
, Paris: Gallimard.
Translated as
The History of Sexuality, Vol. I: An
Introduction
, Robert Hurley (trans.), London: Allen Lane,
1978.
Freeman, Elizabeth, 2019,
Beside You in Time: Sense Methods
and Queer Sociabilities in the American Nineteenth Century
,
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Fujiwara, Lynn and Shireen Roshanravan (eds.), 2018,
Asian
American Feminisms and Women of Color Politics
(Decolonizing
Feminisms), Seattle, WA: University of Washington Press.
Gallop, Jane, 2019,
Sexuality, Disability, and Aging: Queer
Temporalities of the Phallus
, Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
Garry, Ann, 2018, “Analytic Feminism”, in
The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2018 Edition), Edward
N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2018/entries/femapproach-analytic/
>
Garry, Ann, Serene J. Khader, and Alison Stone (eds.), 2017,
The Routledge Companion to Feminist Philosophy
, New York:
Routledge. doi:10.4324/9781315758152
Gerdes, Kendall, 2014, “Performativity”,
TSQ:
Transgender Studies Quarterly
, 1(1–2): 148–150.
doi:10.1215/23289252-2399866
Gherovici, Patricia, 2017,
Transgender Psychoanalysis: A
Lacanian Perspective on Sexual Difference
, New York:
Routledge.
Gossett, Che, 2016, “Žižek’s Trans/Gender
Trouble”,
Los Angeles Review of Books
, 13 September
2016.
 [
Gossett 2016 available online
]
Goswami, Namita, 2019,
Subjects that Matter: Philosophy,
Feminism, and Postcolonial Theory
, Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Grosz, Elizabeth, 1989,
Sexual Subversions: Three French
Feminists
, Sydney: Allen & Unwin Press.
–––, 2012, “The Nature of Sexual
Difference: Irigaray and Darwin”,
Angelaki
, 17(2):
69–93. doi:10.1080/0969725X.2012.701049
Guenther, Lisa, 2013,
Solitary Confinement: Social Death and
Its Afterlives
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.
–––, 2020, “Critical Phenomenology”,
in Gail Weiss, Ann Murphy, and Gayle Salamon (eds.),
50 Concepts
for a Critical Phenomenology
, Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Guilmette, Lauren, 2011, “Reading Butler Reading Beauvoir
Reading Sade: On Ethics and Eros”,
Philosophy Today
,
55(supplement): 292–301.
doi:10.5840/philtoday201155Supplement70
Guy-Sheftall, Beverly (ed.), 1995,
Words of Fire: An Anthology
of African-American Feminist Thought
, New York: The New
Press.
Halberstam, Jack, 2005,
In a Queer Time and Place: Transgender
Bodies, Subcultural Lives
, New York: NYU Press.
Hall, Donald E. and Annamarie Jagose (eds.), 2012,
The
Routledge Queer Studies Reader
, New York: Routledge.
Hall, Kim Q., 2009, “Queer Breasted Experience”, in
“You’ve Changed”: Sex Reassignment and Personal
Identity
, Laurie J. Shrage (ed.), New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 121–134.
–––, 2014, “No Failure: Climate Change,
Radical Hope, and Queer Crip Feminist Eco-Future”,
Radical
Philosophy Review
, 17(1): 203–225.
doi:10.5840/radphilrev201432614
–––, 2014, “Toward a Queer Crip Feminist
Politics of Food”,
philoSOPHIA
, 4(2):
177–196.
–––, 2015a, “Gender”, in
Keywords for Disability Studies
, Rachel Adams, Benjamin
Reiss, and David Serlin (eds.), New York: New York University Press,
89–91.
–––, 2015b, “New Conversations in Feminist
Disability Studies: Feminism, Philosophy, and Borders”,
Hypatia
, 30(1): 1–12. doi:10.1111/hypa.12136
–––, 2017, “Feminist and Queer
Intersections with Disability Studies”, in Garry, Khader, and
Stone 2017: ch. 33.
Hall, Melinda, 2016,
The Bioethics of Enhancement:
Transhumanism, Disability, and Biopolitics
, Lanham, MD: Lexington
Books.
Halley, Janet, 2006,
Split Decisions: How and Why to Take a
Break from Feminism
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Halperin, David, 1995,
Saint Foucault: Towards a Gay
Hagiography
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Hansberry, Lorraine, 1957 [1995], “Simone de Beauvoir and
The Second Sex
: An American Commentary”, unpublished
manuscript. Printed in Guy-Sheftall 1995: 128–142.
Hansen, Jennifer, 2000, “Our ‘Salvation’:
Women’s Intervention in Philosophy”,
Journal for the
Psychoanalysis of Culture and Society
, 5(1): 77–85.
Hansen, Sarah K., 2013, “Julia Kristeva and the Politics of
Life”,
Journal of French and Francophone Philosophy
,
21(1): 27–42. doi:10.5195/JFFP.2013.572
Haraway, Donna J., 2016a,
Manifestly Haraway
,
Minneapolis, MN: Univ Of Minnesota Press.
–––, 2016b,
Staying with the Trouble: Making
Kin in the Chthulucene
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press
Books.
Hartman, Saidiya, 1997,
Scenes of Subjection: Terror, Slavery,
and Self-Making in Nineteenth-Century America
, New York: Oxford
University Press.
–––, 2007,
Lose Your Mother: A Journey Along
the Atlantic Slave Route
, New York: Farrar, Straus and
Giroux.
–––, 2019,
Wayward Lives, Beautiful
Experiments: Intimate Histories of Social Upheaval
, New York: W.
W. Norton & Company.
Havis, Devonya N., 2009, “Blackness beyond Witness: Black
Vernacular Phenomena and Auditory Identity”,
Philosophy
& Social Criticism
, 35(7): 747–759.
doi:10.1177/0191453709106239
–––, 2012, “‘Seeing Black’
through Michel Foucault’s Eyes: ‘Stand Your Ground’
Laws as an Anchorage Point for State-Sponsored Racism”, in
Pursuing Trayvon Martin: Historical Contexts and Contemporary
Manifestations of Racial Dynamics
, George Yancy and Janine H.
Jones (eds.), Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 117–128.
–––, 2013, “The Parrhesiastic Enterprise
of Black Philosophy”,
The Black Scholar
, 43(4):
52–58. doi:10.1080/00064246.2013.11413665
–––, 2014, “‘Now, How You
Sound’: Considering a Different Philosophical Praxis”,
Hypatia
, 29(1): 237–252. doi:10.1111/hypa.12069
Hayward, Eva S., 2017, “Don’t Exist”,
TSQ:
Transgender Studies Quarterly
, 4(2): 191–194.
doi:10.1215/23289252-3814985
Heiner, Brady T. and Sarah K Tyson, 2017, “Feminism and the
Carceral State: Gender-Responsive Justice, Community Accountability,
and the Epistemology of Antiviolence”,
Feminist Philosophy
Quarterly
, 3(1): art. 3. doi:10.5206/fpq/2016.3.3
Heyes, Cressida J., 2003, “Feminist Solidarity after
Queer Theory: The Case of Transgender”,
Signs: Journal of
Women in Culture and Society
, 28(4): 1093–1120.
doi:10.1086/343132
–––, 2007,
Self-Transformations: Foucault,
Ethics, and Normalized Bodies
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195310535.001.0001
Heyes, Cressida J. and J. R. Latham, 2018, “Trans Surgeries
and Cosmetic Surgeries”,
TSQ: Transgender Studies
Quarterly
, 5(2): 174–189. doi:10.1215/23289252-4348617
Hill-Collins, Patricia, 1990 [2015],
Black Feminist
Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness, and the Politics of
Empowerment
, Boston: Unwin Hyman; reprinted
of 2015.
Hill-Collins, Patricia and Sirma Bilge, 2016,
Intersectionality: Key Concepts
, Malden, MA: Polity
Press.
Ho, Jennifer Ann, 2015,
Racial Ambiguity in Asian American
Culture
(Asian American Studies Today), New Brunswick, NJ:
Rutgers University Press.
Ho, Wendy, 1999,
In Her Mother’s House: The Politics of
Asian American Mother-Daughter Writing
(Critical Perspectives on
Asian Pacific Americans Series), Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira
Press.
Hoff, Shannon, 2006, “Restoring Antigone to Ethical Life:
Nature and Sexual Difference in Hegel’s Phenomenology of
Spirit”,
Owl of Minerva
, 38(1): 77–99.
doi:10.5840/owl2006/2007381/28
–––, 2012, “Inheriting Identity and
Practicing Transformation: The Time of Feminist Politics”,
philoSOPHIA
, 2(2): 167–193.
–––, 2015, “Translating Principle into
Practice”:,
The Journal of Speculative Philosophy
,
29(3): 403–414. doi:10.5325/jspecphil.29.3.0403
Hoagland, Sarah Lucia, 2007, “Denying Relationality:
Epistemology and Ethics and Ignorance”, in S. Sullivan and Tuana
2007: 95–118.
Holland, Nancy J. and Patricia Huntington (ed.), 2001,
Feminist Interpretations of Martin Heidegger
, University
Park, PA: Pennsylvania University Press.
hooks, bell, 2000,
Feminist Theory: from Margin to
Center
, Boston, MA: South End Press.
–––, 2014,
Ain’t I a Woman: Black
Women and Feminism
, New York: Routledge.
Hua, Anh, 2005, “Diaspora and Cultural Memory”, in
Diaspora, Memory, and Identity: A Search for Home
, Vijay
Agnew (ed.), Toronto: University of Toronto Press, pp.
171–86.
Huffer, Lynne, 2010,
Mad for Foucault: Rethinking the
Foundations of Queer Theory
, New York: Columbia University
Press.
–––, 2013,
Are the Lips a Grave?: A Queer
Feminist on the Ethics of Sex
, New York: Columbia University
Press.
–––, 2020,
Foucault’s Strange
Eros
, New York: Columbia University Press.
Huffer, Lynne and Shannon Winnubst, 2017, “Introduction to
the Roundtable”,
philoSOPHIA
, 7(1): 137–139.
doi:10.1353/phi.2017.0011
Hull, Akasha (Gloria T.), Patricia Bell-Scott, and Barbara Smith,
1982,
All the Women are White; All the Blacks are Men, But Some of
Us are Brave
, New York: The feminist Press at CUNY.
Huseyinzadegan, Dilek, 2018, “For What Can the Kantian
Feminist Hope? Constructive Complicity in Appropriations of the
Canon”,
Feminist Philosophy Quarterly
, 4(1): art. 3.
doi:10.5206/fpq/2018.1.3
Irigaray, Luce, 1974 [1985],
Speculum de l’autre
femme
, Paris: Éditions de Minuit. Translated as
Speculum of the Other Woman
, Gillian C. Gill (trans.),
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1985.
–––, 1977 [1985],
Ce sexe qui n’en est
pas un
, Paris: Éditions de Minuit. Translated as
This
Sex Which Is Not One
, Catherine Porter and Carolyn Burke
(trans.), Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1985.
–––, 1984 [1993],
Ethique de la
différence sexuelle
, Paris: Éditions de Minuit.
Translated as
An Ethics of Sexual Difference
, Carolyn Burke
and Gillian C. Gill (trans.), Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1993.
Islekel, Ege Selin, 2017, “Absent Death: Necropolitics and
Technologies of Mourning”,
philoSOPHIA
, 7(2):
337–355. doi:10.1353/phi.2017.0027
–––, 2018, “Totalizing the Open: Roots and
Boundary Markers in Wynter and Glissant”,
The CLR James
Journal
, 24(1): 107–123. doi:10.5840/clrjames201812756
Jagose, Annamarie, 2009, “Feminism’s Queer
Theory”,
Feminism & Psychology
, 19(2):
157–174. doi:10.1177/0959353509102152
Jackson, Zakiyyah Iman, 2020,
Becoming Human: Matter and
Meaning in an Antiblack World
, New York: New York University
Press.
James, Joy, 1996,
Resisting State Violence: Radicalism,
Gender, and Race in U.S. Culture
, Minneapolis, MN: University of
Minnesota Press.
–––, 1997,
Transcending the Talented Tenth:
Black Leaders and American Intellectuals
, Abingdon:
Routledge.
––– (ed.), 1998,
The Angela Y. Davis
Reader
, Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
–––, 1999,
Shadowboxing: Representations of
Black Feminist Politics
, New York: St. Martin’s Press.
––– (ed.), 2003,
Imprisoned Intellectuals:
America’s Political Prisoners Write on Life, Liberation, and
Rebellion
, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
––– (ed.), 2005,
The New Abolitionists:
(Neo) Slave Narratives and Contemporary Prison Writings
, (SUNY
Series, Philosophy and Race), Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
–––, 2015, “The Womb of Western Theory:
Trauma, Time Theft, and the Captive Maternal”,
Carceral
Notebooks
, 12(44): 253–296.
 [
Joy 2015 available online (pdf)
]
James, Joy and Tracy Denean Sharpley-Whiting (eds.), 2000,
The
Black Feminist Reader
, Malden, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
James, Robin, 2015,
Resilience & Melancholy: Pop Music,
Feminism, Neoliberalism
, Winchester, UK: Zero Books.
Janssen, Ephraim Das, 2017,
Phenomenal Gender: What
Transgender Experience Discloses
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
Johnson, Barbara, 1980,
The Critical Difference: Essays in the
Contemporary Rhetoric of Reading
, Baltimore, MD: The Johns
Hopkins University.
Johnson, E. Patrick and Mae G. Henderson, 2005,
Black Queer
Studies: A Critical Anthology
, Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
Johnston, Tim R., 2015, “Questioning the Threshold of Sexual
Difference: Irigarayan Ontology and Transgender, Intersex, and
Gender-Nonconforming Being”,
GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and
Gay Studies
, 21(4): 617–633.
doi:10.1215/10642684-3123713
Jones, Rachel, 2011,
Luce Irigaray: Towards a Sexuate
Philosophy
(Key Contemporary Thinkers series), Cambridge: Polity
Press.
–––, 2012, “Irigaray and Lyotard: Birth,
Infancy, and Metaphysics”,
Hypatia
, 27(1):
139–162. doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2011.01236.x
–––, 2014, “Re-Reading Diotima: Resources
for a Relational Pedagogy”,
Journal of Philosophy of
Education
, 48(2): 183–201. doi:10.1111/1467-9752.12066
–––, 2015, “Vital Matters and Generative
Materiality: Between Bennett and Irigaray”,
Journal of the
British Society for Phenomenology
, 46(2): 156–172.
doi:10.1080/00071773.2014.963343
–––, 2018, “Philosophical Métissage
and the Decolonization of Difference: Luce Irigaray, Daniel Maximin,
and the Elemental Sublime”,
Journal of Aesthetics and
Phenomenology
, 5(2): 139–156.
doi:10.1080/20539320.2018.1521569
Karera, Axelle, 2019, “Blackness and the Pitfalls of
Anthropocene Ethics”,
Critical Philosophy of Race
,
7(1): 32–56. doi:10.5325/critphilrace.7.1.0032
Kimoto, Tamsin, 2018, “Merleau-Ponty, Fanon, and
Phenomenological Forays in Trans Life”,
APA Newsletter on
LGBTQ Issues in Philosophy
, 18(1): 16–21.
King, Helen, 1993, “Once Upon A Text: Hysteria from
Hippocrates”, in
Hysteria Beyond Freud
, Sander L.
Gilman, Helen King, Roy Porter, G.S. Rousseau, and Elaine Showalter
(eds.), Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 3–90.
Koyama, Emi, 2003,“The Transfeminist Manifesto”, in
Catching a Wave: Reclaiming Feminism for the 21st Century
,
Rory Dicker and Alison Piepmeier (eds.), Boston, MA: Northeastern
University Press, pp. 244–259.
–––, 2006, “Whose Feminism is it Anyway?

The Unspoken Racism of the Trans Inclusion Debate”, in Stryker
and Whittle 2006: 698–705.
Kramer, Sina, 2017,
Excluded Within: The (Un)Intelligibility
of Radical Political Actors
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Kristeva, Julia, 1974 [1984],
La revolution du langage
poetique; l’avant-garde a la fin du XIXe siecle:
Lautréamont et Mallarmé
, Paris: Éditions du
Seuil. Translated as
Revolution in Poetic Language
, Margaret
Waller (trans.), New York: Columbia University Press, 1984.
–––, 1980 [1982],
Pouvoirs de l’horreur:
essai sur l’abjection
, Paris: Éditions du Seuil.
Translated as
The Powers of Horror: An Essay on Abjection
,
Leon S. Roudiez (trans.), New York: Columbia University Press.
–––, 2000 [2002],
Le Révolte intime :
pouvoirs et limites de la psychanalyse
, Paris: Fayard; translated
as
Intimate Revolt: The Powers and Limits of Psychoanalysis
,
Jeanine Herman (trans.), New York: Columbia University Press.
Labaton, Vivien and Dawn Lundy Martin, 2004,
The Fire This
Time: Young Activists and the New Feminism
, New York: Anchor
Books.
Lee, Emily S., 2010, “Madness and Judiciousness: A
Phenomenological Reading of a Black Woman’s Encounter with a
Saleschild”, in Del Guadalupe Davidson, Gines, and Marcano 2010:
183–200.
––– (ed.), 2014,
Living Alterities:
Phenomenology, Embodiment, and Race
(SUNY Series, Philosophy and
Race), Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
–––, 2019, “A Phenomenology of Seeing and
Affect in a Polarized Climate”, in
Race as Phenomena:
Between Phenomenology and Philosophy of Race
, Emily S. Lee (ed.),
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, pp. 107–123.
Lee, Jid, 2002, “The Cry-Smile Mask: A Korean-American
Women’s System of Resistance”, in Anzaldúa and
Keating 2002: 397–402.
Lee, Kyoo, 2014, “On the Transformative Potential of the
‘Dark Female Animal’ in Daodejing”, in
Asian and
Feminist Philosophies in Dialogue: Liberating Traditions
,
Jennifer McWeeny and Ashby Butnor (eds.), New York: Columbia
University Press, pp. 57–77.
Lee, Robyn, 2018, “Breastfeeding and Sexual Difference:
Queering Irigaray”,
Feminist Theory
, 19(1):
77–94. doi:10.1177/1464700117742876
Levy, Jacob T. and Iris Marion Young (eds.), 2011,
Colonialism
and Its Legacies
, Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.
Lennon, Kathleen, 2019 “Feminist Perspectives on the
Body”, in
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall
2019 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2019/entries/feminist-body/
>
Lim, Genny, 1983, “Wonder Woman”, in Moraga and
Anzaldúa 1981: 25–26.
Lim, Shirley Geok-Lin, 2002, “Memory and the New-Born: The
Maternal Imagination in Diaspora”, in Anzaldúa and
Keating 2002: 208–222.
Lim, Shirley Geok-Lin and Mayumi Tsutakawa, 1989,
The
Forbidden Stitch: An Asian American Women’s Anthology
,
Corvallis, OR: Calyx Books.
Lloyd, Genevieve, 1984,
The Man of Reason: “Male”
and “Female” in Western Philosophy
, London:
Methuen.
Lorde, Audre, 1984a, “The Master’s Tools Will Never
Dismantle the Master’s House”, comments at the Personal
and Political panel, Second Sex Conference, New York, 29 September,
1979, published in Lorde 1984c: 110–113.
–––, 1984b, “Age, Race, Class, and Sex:
Women Redefining Difference”, Paper given at the Copeland
Colloquium, Amherst College, April 1980, published in Lorde 1984c:
114–123
–––, 1984c,
Sister Outsider: Essays and
Speeches
, Berkeley, CA: Crossing Press.
Love, Heather, 2014, “Queer”,
Transgender Studies
Quarterly
1 (1–2): 172–76.
Lowe, Lisa, 1991, “Heterogeneity, Hybridity, Multiplicity:
Marking Asian American Differences”,
Diaspora: A Journal of
Transnational Studies
, 1(1): 24–44.
doi:10.1353/dsp.1991.0014
Lugones, María, 2003,
Pilgrimages/Peregrinajes:
Theorizing Coalition against Multiple Oppressions
, Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
–––, 2007, “Heterosexualism and the
Colonial/Modern Gender System”,
Hypatia
, 22(1):
186–219. doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2007.tb01156.x
–––, 2008, “The Coloniality of
Gender”,
Worlds and Knowledges Otherwise
, 2(2):
1–17.
 [
Lugones 2008 available online (pdf)
]
–––, 2010, “Toward a Decolonial
Feminism”,
Hypatia
, 25(4): 742–759.
doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2010.01137.x
Lugones, María C. and Elizabeth V. Spelman, 1983,
“Have We Got a Theory for You! Feminist Theory, Cultural
Imperialism and the Demand for ‘the Woman’s
Voice’”,
Women’s Studies International
Forum
, 6(6): 573–581. doi:10.1016/0277-5395(83)90019-5
MacDonald, Iain, 2013, “Between Normativity and
Freedom”:,
Symposium: Canadian Journal for Continental
Philosophy
, 17(1): 1–9. doi:10.5840/symposium20131711
Mader, Mary Beth, 2008 [2016], “Luce Irigaray and
Anthropological Thought”, in
Engaging the World: Thinking
after Irigaray
, Mary C. Rawlinson (ed.), Albany, NY: SUNY Press,
215–230.
–––, 2011,
Sleights of Reason: Norm,
Bisexuality, Development
, Albany, NY: SUNY Press
Malatino, Hilary, 2019, “Tough Breaks: Trans Rage and the
Cultivation of Resilience”,
Hypatia
, 34(1):
121–140. doi:10.1111/hypa.12446
Mann, Anika Maaza, 2010, “Race and Feminist Standpoint
Theory”, in Del Guadalupe Davidson, Gines, and Marcano 2010:
105–120.
Mann, Bonnie, 2006,
Women’s Liberation and the Sublime:
Feminism, Postmodernism, Environment
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/0195187458.001.0001
–––, 2012, “Creepers, Flirts, Heroes and
Allies: Four Theses on Men and Sexual Harassment”, in Margaret
Crouch (ed.), issue on Sexual Harassment,
The American
Philosophical Association Newsletter on Feminism and Philosophy
,
11(2): 24–31.
 [
Mann 2012 available online
]
–––, 2013, “Three White Men Walk into a
Bar: Philosophy’s Pluralism”,
Radical Philosophy
Review
, 16(3): 733–746.
doi:10.5840/radphilrev201316354
–––, 2014,
Sovereign Masculinity: Gender
Lessons from the War on Terror
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199981649.001.0001
Marcano, Donna-Dale L., 2003, “Sartre and the Social
Construction of Race”, in
Race and Racism in Continental
Philosophy
, Robert Bernasconi (ed.), Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press, pp. 214–226.
–––, 2010, “The Difference that Difference
Makes: Black Feminism and Philosophy”, in Del Guadalupe
Davidson, Gines, and Marcano 2010: 53–66
–––, 2012, “The Color of Change in
Continental Feminist Philosophy”,
The Journal of Speculative
Philosophy
, 26(2): 211–215
doi:10.5325/jspecphil.26.2.0211
–––, 2014, “Race/Gender and the
Philosopher’s Body”, in E. Lee 2014: 65–78.
Martin, Kameelah L., 2018,
Envisioning Black Feminist Voodoo
Aesthetics: African Spirituality in American Cinema
, Lanham, MD:
Lexington Books.
Marvin, Amy, 2019, “A Brief History of Trans
Philosophy”,
Contingent Magazine
, 21 September 2019.
 [
Marvin 2019 available online
]
–––, 2020, “Transsexuality, the Curio, and
the Transgender Tipping-Point”, in
Curiosity Studies: A New
Ecology of Knowledge
, Perry Zurn and Arjun Shankar (eds.),
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, ch. 11.
McAfee, Noëlle, 2000,
Habermas, Kristeva, and
Citizenship
, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
–––, 2003,
Julia Kristeva
, New York:
Routledge.
–––, 2008,
Democracy and the Political
Unconscious
, New York: Columbia University Press.
–––, 2019,
Fear of Breakdown: Politics and
Psychoanalysis
, New York: Columbia University Press.
McAuliffe, Jana, 2020, “Ethical Openness in the Work of
Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak”,
Feminist Philosophy
Quarterly
, 6(2), Article 3. doi:10.5206/fpq/2020.2.7574
–––, 2020, “She’s Making Profit Now:
Neoliberalism, Ethics, and Feminist Critique”,
philoSOPHIA:
A Journal of transContinental Feminism
, 10(1): 24–46.
McClintock, Anne, 1995,
Imperial Leather: Race, Gender and
Sexuality in the Colonial Contest
, London: Routledge.
McClintock. Anne, Amir Mufti, and Ella Shohat, 1997,
Dangerous
Liaisons: Gender, nation, and Postcolonial Perspectives
,
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
McKinnon, Rachel, 2018, “The Epistemology of
Propaganda”,
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
,
96(2): 483–489. doi:10.1111/phpr.12429
McWhorter, Ladelle, 1999,
Bodies and Pleasures: Foucault and
the Politics of Sexual Normalization
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
–––, 2009,
Racism and Sexual Oppression in
Anglo-America: A Genealogy
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
–––, 2012, “Queer Economies”,
Foucault Studies
, 14: 61–78.
doi:10.22439/fs.v0i14.3891
Mignolo, Walter D., 2002, “The Geopolitics of Knowledge and
the Colonial Difference”,
South Atlantic Quarterly
,
101(1): 57–96. doi:10.1215/00382876-101-1-57
Miller, Elaine P., 2002,
The Vegetative Soul: From Philosophy
of Nature to Subjectivity in the Feminine
, Albany, NY: SUNY
Press.
–––, 2014,
Head Cases: Julia Kristeva on
Philosophy and Art in Depressed Times
, New York: Columbia
University Press.
–––, 2017, “Critique of Continental
Feminism”,
philoSOPHIA
, 7(7): 149–156.
doi:10.1353/phi.2017.0013
Millett, Kate, 1970,
Sexual Politics
, Garden City, NY:
Doubleday and Co.; reprinted 2000, Urbana, IL: The University of
Illinois Press.
Mohanty, Chandra Talpade, 1984, “Under Western Eyes:
Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Discourses”,
boundary
2
, 12(3): 333–358. doi:10.2307/302821
–––, 2003, “‘Under Western
Eyes’ Revisited: Feminist Solidarity through Anticapitalist
Struggles”,
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and
Society
, 28(2): 499–535. doi:10.1086/342914
Moraga, Cherríe and Gloria Anzaldúa (eds.), 1981
[2015],
This Bridge Called My Back: Writings by Radical Women of
Color
, Watertown, MA: Persephone Press. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press; reprinted 2015.
Morrison, Toni, 1992,
Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the
Literary Imagination
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Murphy, Ann V., 2012,
Violence and the Philosophical
Imaginary
, Albany, NY: SUNY.
Namaste, Ki [Viviane K.], 1996, “‘Tragic
Misreadings’: Queer theory’s erasure of transgender
subjectivity”, in
Queer Studies: A Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual,
and Transgender Anthology
, Brett Beemyn and Mickey Eliason
(eds.), Albany, NY: New York University Press, pp. 183–206;
reprinted in Viviane K. Namaste (ed.),
Invisible Lives: The
Erasure of Transsexual and Transgendered People
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 2000, pp. 9–23.
–––, 2009, “Undoing Theory: The
‘Transgender Question’ and the Epistemic Violence of
Anglo-American Feminist Theory”,
Hypatia
, 24(3):
11–32. doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2009.01043.x
Narayan, Uma, 1997,
Dislocating Cultures: Identities,
Traditions, and Third World Feminism
, New York: Routledge.
–––, 2003, “What’s a Brown Girl like
You Doing in the Ivory Tower? Or, How I Became a Feminist
Philosopher”, in
Singing in the Fire: Stories of Women in
Philosophy
, Linda Martín Alcoff (ed.), Lanham, MD: Rowman
& Littlefield Publishers, pp. 81–92.
Narayan, Uma and Sandra Harding (eds.), 2000,
Decentering the
Center: Philosophy for a Multicultural, Postcolonial, and Feminist
World
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Nardal, Paulette, 1932 [2001], “Eveil de la conscience de
race/The Awakening of Race Consciousness” (in both French and
English),
La Revue du Monde Noir
, 6: 25–31; English
version reprinted in
Race
, Robert Bernasconi (ed.), Malden,
MA: Blackwell, 2001, Chapter 6.
Nash, Jennifer, 2019,
Black Feminism Reimagined: After
Intersectionality
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Noble, Bobby, 2012, “Trans. Panic. Some Thoughts toward a
Theory of Feminist Fundamentalism”, in Enke 2012b:
45–59.
Oliver, Kelly, 1995,
Womanizing Nietzsche: Philosophy’s
Relation to “the Feminine”
, New York: Routledge,
–––, 1997,
Family Values: Subjects Between
Nature and Culture
, New York: Routledge.
–––, 2004,
The Colonization of Psychic
Space: A Psychoanalytic Social Theory of Oppression
, Minneapolis,
MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Oliver, Kelly, Lisa Madura, and Sabeen Ahmed (eds.), 2019,
Refugees Now: Rethinking Borders, Hospitality, and
Citizenship
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Ortega, Mariana, 2001, “‘New Mestizas,’
‘’World’-Travelers,’ and
‘
Dasein
’: Phenomenology and the Multi-Voiced,
Multi-Cultural Self”,
Hypatia
, 16(3): 1–29.
doi:10.1353/hyp.2001.0043
–––, 2006, “Phenomenological Encuentros:
Existential Phenomenology and Latin American & U.S. Latina
Feminism”,
Radical Philosophy Review
, 9(1):
45–64. doi:10.5840/radphilrev2006911
–––, 2016,
In-Between: Latina Feminist
Phenomenology, Multiplicity, and the Self
, Albany, NY: SUNY
Press.
–––, 2017, “Sophia Is Still White …
So Is Knowledge: Reflections on Visuality, Dialogic Possibilities, and
the Limits of Continental Feminism”,
philoSOPHIA
, 7(1):
157–164. doi:10.1353/phi.2017.0014
Ortega, Mariana and Linda Martín Alcoff (eds.), 2009,
Constructing the Nation: A Race and Nationalism Reader
,
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Oyěwùmí, Oyèrónkẹ́, 2007,
The
Invention of Women. Making an African Sense of Western Gender
Discourses
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Paris, William M., 2019, “‘One Does Not Write for
Slaves’: Wynter, Sartre, and the Poetic Phenomenology of
Invention”,
The Journal of Speculative Philosophy
,
33(3): 407–421. doi:10.5325/jspecphil.33.3.0407
Park, Jin Y., 2009, “The Double: Merleau-Ponty and Chinul on
Thinking and Questioning”, in Jin Y. Park and Gereon Kopf
(eds.),
Merleau-Ponty and Buddhism
, Lanham, MD: Lexington
Books, pp. 97–112.
Peña-Guzmán, David M., 2016, “Beauvoir’s
Reading of Biology in The Second Sex”,
Journal of French and
Francophone Philosophy
, 24(2): 259–285.
doi:10.5195/JFFP.2016.726
Pérez, Emma, 1998, “Irigaray’s Female Symbolic
in the Making of Chicana Lesbian
Sitios y Lenguas
(Sites and
Discourses)”,
Living Chicana Theory
, Carla Mari
Trujillo (ed.), Berkeley, CA: Third Woman Press, 87–101.
–––, 1999,
The Decolonial Imaginary: Writing
Chicanas into History
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Pham, Minh-ha T., 2002, “(Re)Writing Home: A
Daughter’s Letter to Her Mother”, in Anzaldúa and
Keating, 2002: 176–180.
Pitts, Andrea J., 2016, “Gloria E. Anzaldúa’s
Autohistoria‐teoría
as an Epistemology of
Self‐Knowledge/Ignorance”,
Hypatia
, 31(2):
352–369. doi:10.1111/hypa.12235
–––, 2018, “Embodied Thresholds of
Sanctuary: Abolitionism and Trans Worldmaking”,
APA
Newsletter on LGBT Issues in Philosophy
, 18(1): 3–10.
Prosser, Jay, 1998,
Second Skins: The Body Narratives of
Transsexuality
, New York: Columbia University Press.
Puar, Jasbir K., 2007,
Terrorist Assemblages: Homonationalism
in Queer Times
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
–––, 2017,
The Right to Maim: Debility,
Capacity, Disability
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Quijano, Aníbal, 2000, “Coloniality of Power,
Eurocentrism, and Latin America”,
Nepantla: Views from
South
, 1(3): 533–580. [Translated by Michael Ennis; An
abridged version was published in the same year with the same title in
International Sociology
, 15(2): 215–232.
doi:10.1177/0268580900015002005]
Raghavan, Anjana, 2017,
Towards Corporeal Cosmopolitanism:
Performing Decolonial Solidarities
, London: Rowman &
Littlefield.
Rakes, H., 2013, “Toward a Theoretico-Practical
Accountability to Difference and Relationality”,
Disability
Studies Quarterly
, 33(4): art. 7.
doi:10.18061/dsq.v33i4.3873
–––, 2014, “Philosophical Happiness and
the Relational Production of Philosophical Space”, in Namita
Goswami et al (eds.),
Why Race and Gender Still Matter
,
Namita Goswami, Maeve M. O’Donovan and Lisa Yount (eds.), New York:
Routledge, ch. 11.
Reynolds, Joel Michael and Anita Silvers, 2017, “Feminism
and Disability”, in
Philosophy: Feminism
, Carol Hay
(ed.), Farmington Hills, MI: Macmillan Reference USA, pp.
295–316.
Rubin, Gayle S., 1975, “The Traffic in Women: Notes on the
‘Political Economy’ of Sex”, in
Toward an
Anthropology of Women
, Rayna R. Reiter (ed.), New York: Monthly
Review Press, 157–210,
–––, 1993, “Thinking Sex: Notes for a
Radical Theory of the Politics of Sexuality”, in
The Lesbian
and Gay Studies Reader
, H. Abelove , M.A. Barale and D.M.
Halperin (eds.), New York: Routledge, pp. 3–44.
–––, 2011,
Deviations: A Gayle Rubin
Reader
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Rubin, Henry S., 1998, “Phenomenology as Method in Trans
Studies”,
GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies
,
4(2): 263–281. doi:10.1215/10642684-4-2-263
–––, 2003,
Self-Made Men: Identity and
Embodiment among Transsexual Men
, Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt
University Press.
Russell, Camisha A., 2010, “Black American Sexuality and the
Repressive Hypothesis: Reading Patricia Hill Collins with Michel
Foucault”, in Del Guadalupe Davidson, Gines, and Marcano 2010:
201–224.
–––, 2018,
The Assisted Reproduction of
Race
, Indianapolis, IN: Indiana University Press.
Ruíz, Elena Flores, 2014, “Musing: Spectral
Phenomenologies: Dwelling Poetically in Professional
Philosophy”,
Hypatia
, 29(1): 196–204.
doi:10.1111/hypa.12066
–––, 2016a, “Linguistic Alterity and the
Multiplicitous Self: Critical Phenomenologies in Latina Feminist
Thought”,
Hypatia
, 31(2): 421–436.
doi:10.1111/hypa.12239
–––, 2016b, “Existentialism for
Postcolonials: Fanon and the Politics of Authenticity”,
APA
Newsletter on Hispanic /Latino Issues in Philosophy
. 15(2):
19–22.
Salah, Trish, 2018, “Undoing Trans Studies”,
TOPIA: Canadian Journal of Cultural Studies
, 17:
150–155. doi:10.3138/topia.17.150
Salamon, Gayle, 2009, “Justification and Queer Method, or
Leaving Philosophy”,
Hypatia
, 24(1): 225–230.
doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2009.00015.x
–––, 2010a,
Assuming a Body: Transgender
Theory and Rhetorics of Materiality
, New York: Columbia
University Press.
–––, 2010b, “Rethinking Gender: Judith
Butler and Feminist Philosophy”, in
The History of
Continental Philosophy, Volume 8: Emerging Trends in Continental
Philosophy
, Todd May (ed.), Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
ch. 1.
–––, 2018a,
The Life and Death of Latisha
King: A Critical Phenomenology of Transphobia
, New York: NYU
Press.
–––, 2018b, “Gender Essentialism and
Eidetic Inquiry”, in
Rethinking Feminist Phenomenology:
Theoretical and Applied Perspectives
, Sara Cohen Shabot and
Christinia Landry (eds.), Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield
International, 33–50.
Salih, Sara, 2002,
Judith Butler
, New York:
Routledge.
Sandoval, Chela, 2000,
Methodology of the Oppressed
,
Minnesota, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
Sawicki, Jana, 2005, “Queering Foucault and the Subject of
Feminism”, in
The Cambridge Companion to Michel
Foucault
, Gary Gutting (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, updated and revised edition, 379–400.
doi:10.1017/CCOL0521840821.014
Scheman, Naomi, 1996, “Queering the Center by Centering the
Queer: Reflections on Transsexuals and Secular Jews”, in
Feminists Rethink the Self
, Diana Tietjens Meyers (ed.),
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, pp. 124–162.
–––, 2016, “Looking Back on
‘Queering the Center’”,
TSQ: Transgender Studies
Quarterly
, 3(1–2): 212–219.
doi:10.1215/23289252-3334403
Schotten, C. Heike, 2018,
Queer Terror: Life, Death, and
Desire in the Settler Colony
, New York: Columbia University
Press.
Schutte, Ofelia, 1984,
Beyond Nihilism: Nietzsche Without
Masks
, Chicago; London: The University of Chicago Press.
–––, 1993,
Cultural Identity and Social
Liberation in Latin American Thought
, Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press.
–––, 2011, “Resistance to Colonialism: The
Latin American Legacy of José Martí”,
Colonialism and Its Legacies
, Jacob T. Levy with Iris Marion
Young (ed.), Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 181–204.
Scott, Jacqueline, 2017, “Effortful Agon: Learning to Think
and Feel Differently about Race”, in
Oxford Handbook of
Philosophy and Race
, Naomi Zack (ed.), New York: Oxford
University Press, 2017): pp. 411–419.
Scott, Joan W., 1992, “Multiculturalism and the Politics of
Identity”,
October
, 61: 12–19.
doi:10.2307/778780
Scott-Dixon, Krista (ed.), 2006,
Trans/forming Feminisms:
Transfeminist Voices Speak Out
, Toronto, ON: Sumach Press.
Scuro, Jennifer, 2018,
Addressing Ableism: Philosophical
Questions via Disability Studies
, Lanham, MD: Lexington
Books.
Sealey, Kris, 2014,
Moments of Disruption: Levinas, Sartre,
and the Question of Transcendence
, Albany, NY: State University
of New York Press.
–––, 2017, “Reflections on the Status of
Continental Feminism”,
philoSOPHIA
, 7(1):
165–170. doi:10.1353/phi.2017.0015
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky, 1993, “Queer and Now”, in her
Tendencies
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1–20.
doi:10.1215/9780822381860-001
–––, 1990 [2008],
Epistemology of the
Closet
, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press; updated
edition, 2008.
Seigworth, Gregory J. and Melissa Gregg, 2010, “An Inventory
of Shimmers”, in
The Affect Theory Reader
, Melissa
Gregg and Gregory J. Seigworth (eds.), Durham, NC: Duke University
Press, 1–25.
Senghor, Léopold Sédar, 1991,
The Collected
Poetry
, Melvin Dixon (trans.), Charlottesville, VA: University of
Virginia Press.
Shah, Sonia (ed.), 1998,
Dragon Ladies: Asian American
Feminists Breathe Fire
, Boston: South End Press.
Sharp, Hasana and Chloë Taylor (eds.), 2016,
Feminist
Philosophies of Life
, Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University
Press.
Sharpe, Christina, 2016,
In the Wake: On Blackness and
Being
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Sharpley-Whiting, T. Denean, 1998,
Frantz Fanon: Conflicts and
Feminisms
, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
–––, 1999,
Black Venus: Sexualized Savages,
Primal Fears, and Primitive Narratives in French
, Durham, NC:
Duke University Press.
–––, 2002,
Negritude Women
,
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.
–––, 2007,
Pimps Up, Ho’s Down: Hip
Hop’s Hold on Young Black Women
, New York: New York
University Press.
Sheth, Falguni A., 2006, “Unruly Muslim Women and Threats to
Liberal Culture”,
Peace Review
, 18(4): 455–463.
doi:10.1080/10402650601030328
–––, 2014, “Interstitiality: Making Space
for Migration, Diaspora, and Racial Complexity”,
Hypatia
, 29(1): 75–93. doi:10.1111/hypa.12075
–––, 2017, “Knocking Down the Gates:
Reconsidering the Myopias and Borders of Continental Feminist
Philosophy”,
philoSOPHIA
, 7(1): 141–147.
doi:10.1353/phi.2017.0012
Shotwell, Alexis, 2012, “Open Normativities: Gender,
Disability, and Collective Political Change”,
Signs: Journal
of Women in Culture and Society
, 37(4): 989–1016.
doi:10.1086/664475
Shotwell, Alexis and Trevor Sangrey, 2008, “Resisting
Definition: Gendering through Interaction and Relational
Selfhood”,
Hypatia
, 24(3): 56–76.
doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2009.01045.x
Snorton, C. Riley, 2017,
Black on Both Sides: A Racial History
of Trans Identity
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.
Snorton, C. Riley and Jin Haritaworn, 2013, “Trans
Necropolitics: A Transnational Reflection on Violence, Death, and the
Trans of Color Afterlife”, in Stryker and Aizura 2013:
66–76.
 [
Snorton and Haritaworn 2013 available online
]
Söderbäck, Fanny (ed), 2010,
Feminist Readings of
Antigone
, Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Spade, Dean, 2011 [2015],
Normal Life: Administrative
Violence, Critical Trans Politics and the Limits of Law
, Boston:
South End Press; reprinted in 2015.
Spelman, Elizabeth V., 2007, “Managing Ignorance”, in
S. Sullivan and Tuana 2007: 119–131 .
Spillers, Hortense J., 1987, “Mama’s Baby,
Papa’s Maybe: An American Grammar Book”,
Diacritics
, 17(2): 64–81. doi:10.2307/464747
–––, 1996, “‘All the Things You
Could Be by Now, If Sigmund Freud’s Wife Was Your Mother’:
Psychoanalysis and Race”,
boundary 2
, 23(3):
75–141. doi:10.2307/303639
Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty, 1988,
Marxism and the
Interpretation of Culture
, Cary Nelson and Lawrence Grossberg
(eds.), Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press, 271–313.
–––, 1999,
A Critique of Postcolonial
Reason: Toward a History of the Vanishing Present
, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
–––, 2013,
An Aesthetic Education in the Era
of Globalization
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Stephano, Oli, 2019, “Irreducibility and (Trans) Sexual
Difference”,
Hypatia
, 34(1): 141–54.
doi:10.1111/hypa.12447
Stewart, Amy Ray, 2017, “Transgender Subjectivity in
Revolt”,
TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly
,
4(3–4): 577–607. doi:10.1215/23289252-4189974
Stewart, Lindsey, 2017, “Work the Root: Black Feminism,
Hoodoo Love Rituals, and Practices of Freedom”,
Hypatia
, 32 (1): 103–118. doi:10.1111/hypa.12309
Stoler, Ann Laura, 1995,
Race and the Education of Desire:
Foucault’s History of Sexuality and the Colonial Order of
Things
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Stone, Alison, 2015, “The Politics of Clarity”,
Hypatia
, 30(3): 613–619. doi:10.1111/hypa.12143
Stone, Sandy, 1991, “The Empire Strikes Back: A
Posttransexual Manifesto”, in
Body Guards: The Cultural
Politics of Gender Ambiguity
, Julia Epstein and Kristina Straub
(eds.), New York: Routledge, pp. 280–304.
Stryker, Susan, 1994, “My Words to Victor Frankenstein Above
the Village of Chamounix: Performing Transgender Rage”,
GLQ:
A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies
, 1(3): 237–254.
doi:10.1215/10642684-1-3-237
–––, 2004, “Transgender Studies: Queer
Theory’s Evil Twin”,
GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay
Studies
, 10(2): 212–215. doi:10.1215/10642684-10-2-212
–––, 2008,
Transgender History
,
Berkeley, CA: Seal Press.
Stryker, Susan and Aren Z. Aizura (eds.), 2013,
The
Transgender Studies Reader 2
, New York: Routledge.
Stryker, Susan and Stephen Whittle (eds.), 2006,
The
Transgender Studies Reader
, New York: Routledge.
Sullivan, Nikki, 2003,
A Critical Introduction to Queer
Theory
, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Sullivan, Shannon, 2006,
Revealing Whiteness: The Unconscious
Habits of Racial Privilege
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
–––, 2014,
Good White People: The Problem
with Middle-Class White Anti-Racism
, Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Sullivan, Shannon and Erin Tarver, 2019, “Intersections
Between Pragmatist and Continental Feminism”, in
The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2019 Edition), Edward
N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2019/entries/femapproach-prag-cont/
>
Sullivan, Shannon and Nancy Tuana (eds.), 2007,
Race and
Epistemologies of Ignorance
, Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Tarver, Erin C., 2017,
The I in Team: Sports Fandom and the
Reproduction of Identity
, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Taylor, Chloë, 2017,
The Routledge Guidebook to
Foucault’s The History of Sexuality
, Abingdon, UK:
Routledge.
–––, forthcoming,
Foucault, Feminism, and
Sex Crimes: An Anti-Carceral Analysis
, Abingdon, UK:
Routledge.
Taylor, Keeanga-Yamahtta (ed.), 2017,
How We Get Free: Black
Feminism and the Combahee River Collective
, Chicago: Haymarket
Books.
Terrefe, Selamawit D., 2020, “The Pornotrope of Decolonial
Feminism”,
Critical Philosophy of Race
, 8(1–2):
134–164. doi:10.5325/critphilrace.8.1-2.0134
Tremain, Shelley, 2016,
Foucault and Feminist Philosophy of
Disability
, Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Truth, Sojourner, 1851 [1995], “Woman’s Rights”,
in Guy-Sheftall 1995: 36-37.
Tuana, Nancy, 2004, “Coming to Understand: Orgasm and the
Epistemology of Ignorance”,
Hypatia
, 19(1):
194–232. doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2004.tb01275.x
Tyson, Sarah. 2018,
Where Are the Women? Why Expanding the
Archive Makes Philosophy Better
, New York: Columbia University
Press.
Valentine, David, 2012, “Sue E. Generous: Toward a Theory of
Non-Transexuality”,
Feminist Studies
, 38(1):
185–211.
Velez, Emma D., 2019, “Decolonial Feminism at the
Intersection: A Critical Reflection on the Relationship Between
Decolonial Feminism and Intersectionality”,
The Journal of
Speculative Philosophy
, 33(3): 390–406.
Vitulli, Elias Walker, 2018, “Dangerous Embodiments:
Segregating Sexual Perversion as Contagion in US Penal
Institutions”,
Feminist Formations
, 30(1):
21–45.
Wang, Robin R., 2016, “Yinyang Gender Dynamics: Lived
Bodies, Rhythmical Changes, and Cultural Performances”, in Ann
A. Pang-White (ed.),
The Bloomsbury Research Handbook of Chinese
Philosophy and Gender
(Bloomsbury Research Handbooks in Asian
Philosophy), London; New York: Bloomsbury Academic, pp.
205–227.
Warner, Michael, 1993, “Introduction”, in
Fear of
a Queer Planet: Queer Politics and Social Theory
, Michael Warner
(ed.), Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
vii–xxxi
Weheliye, Alexander G., 2014,
Habeas Viscus: Racializing
Assemblages, Biopolitics, and Black Feminist Theories of the
Human
, Durham and London: Duke University Press.
Weinstein, Jami, 2017, “Continental Feminism: Reclaiming the
Dark Continent”,
philoSOPHIA
, 7(1): 171–177.
doi:10.1353/phi.2017.0016
Weiss, Gail, 1999,
Body Images: Embodiment as
Intercorporeality
, New York: Routledge.
–––, 2008,
Refiguring the Ordinary
,
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Weiss, Gail, Ann Murphy, and Gayle Salamon (eds.), 2020,
50
Concepts for a Critical Phenomenology
, Evanston, IL: Northwestern
University Press.
Whitney, Shiloh, 2016, “Affective Indigestion: Lorde, Fanon,
and Gutierrez-Rodriguez on Race and Affective Labor”,
The
Journal of Speculative Philosophy
, 30(3): 278–291.
doi:10.5325/jspecphil.30.3.0278
Willett, Cynthia, 1995,
Maternal Ethics and Other Slave
Moralities
, New York: Routledge
–––, 2008,
Irony in the Age of Empire: Comic
Perspectives on Democracy and Freedom
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana
University Press.
–––, 2014,
Interspecies Ethics
, New
York: Columbia University Press.
Willett, Cynthia and Julie Willett, 2019,
Uproarious: How
Feminists and Other Subversive Comics Speak Truth
, Minneapolis,
MN: Minnesota University Press.
Williams, Patricia, 1991, “The Death of the Profane: A
Commentary on the Genre of Legal Writing”, in her
The
Alchemy of Race and Rights
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press, 44–51.
Winnubst, Shannon, 2006,
Queering Freedom
, Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press.
–––, 2010, “Temporality in Queer Theory
and Continental Philosophy”,
Philosophy Compass
, 5(2):
136–146. doi:10.1111/j.1747-9991.2009.00278.x
–––, 2015,
Way Too Cool: Selling out Race
and Ethics
, New York: Columbia University Press.
Women of South Asian Descent Collective (ed), 1993,
Our Feet
Walk the Sky: Women of the South Asian Diaspora
, San Francisco,
CA: Aunt Lute Books.
Wong, Nellie, 1981a, “In Search of the Self as Hero:
Confetti of Voices on New Year’s Night”, in Moraga and
Anzaldúa 1981: 177–181.
–––, 1981b, “When I Was Growing Up”,
in Moraga and Anzaldúa 1981: 7–8.
Woo, Merle, 1981, “Letter to Ma”, in Moraga and
Anzaldúa 1981: 140–147.
Wynter, Sylvia, 1990, “Beyond Miranda’s Meanings:
Un/Silencing the ‘Demonic Ground’ of Caliban’s
‘Woman’”, in
Out of the Kumbla, Caribbean Women
and Literature
, Carole Boyce Davies and Elaine Savory Fido (eds.),
Trenton, NJ: Africa World Press, 355–370.
–––, 1995, “1492: A New World View”,
in
Race, Discourse, and the Origin of the Americas: A New World
View
, Vera Lawrence Hyatt and Rex Nettleford (eds.), Washington,
DC: Smithsonian Institution Press, 5–57.
–––, 2003, “Unsettling the Coloniality of
Being/Power/Truth/Freedom: Towards the Human, After Man, Its
Overrepresentation—An Argument”,
CR: The New
Centennial Review
, 3(3): 257–337.
doi:10.1353/ncr.2004.0015
–––, 2006, “On How We Mistook the Map for
the Territory, and Re-Imprisoned Ourselves in Our Unbearable Wrongness
of Being of
Desêtre
: Black Studies Toward the Human
Project”, in Lewis R. Gordon and Jane Anna Gordon (eds.),
Not
Only the Master’s Tools: African-American Studies in Theory and
Practice
, Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers: 107–172.
Yamada, Mitsuye, 1981a, “Asian Pacific American Women and
Feminism”, in Moraga and Anzaldúa 1981: 71–75.
–––, 1981b, “Invisibility Is an Unnatural
Disaster: Reflections of an Asian American Woman”, in Moraga and
Anzaldúa 1981: 35–40.
Yancy, George, 2018,
Backlash: What Happens When We Talk
Honestly about Racism in America
, Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield.
Yang, Hyosil, 2019, “As a Translator and Reader of Judith
Butler in Korea”,
philoSOPHIA
, 9(1): 135–137.
doi:10.1353/phi.2019.0002
Yergeau, Melanie, 2018,
Authoring Autism: On Rhetoric and
Neurological Queerness
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Young, Iris Marion, 1980, “Throwing like a Girl: A
Phenomenology of Feminine Body Comportment Motility and
Spatiality”,
Human Studies
, 3: 137–156.
doi:10.1007/BF02331805
–––, 1990,
Justice and the Politics of
Difference
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Zack, Naomi, 1993,
Race and Mixed Race
, Philadelphia, PA:
Temple University Press.
Zakin, Emily, 2011, “Psychoanalytic Feminism”, in
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Summer 2011
Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2011/entries/feminism-psychoanalysis/
>
–––, 2017, “The Drama of Independence:
Narcissism, Childhood, and the Family Complexes”, in
The
Blackwell Companion to Simone de Beauvoir
, Nancy Bauer and Laura
Hengehold (eds.), Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, pp. 99–110.
Zambrana, Rocío, 2017, “Boundary, Ambivalence,
Jaibería
, or, How to Appropriate Hegel”, in
Creolizing Hegel
, Michael Monahan (ed.), (Creolizing the
Canon), Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield, ch. 1.
–––, forthcoming,
Colonial Debts: The Case
of Puerto Rico
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press
Zheng, Robin, 2016, “Why Yellow Fever Isn’t
Flattering: A Case Against Racial Fetishes”,
Journal of the
American Philosophical Association
, 2(3): 400–419.
doi:10.1017/apa.2016.25
Zurn, Perry, 2016, “The Politics of Anonymity: Foucault,
Feminism, and Gender Non-Conforming Prisoners”,
philoSOPHIA
, 6(1): 27–42.
doi:10.1353/phi.2016.0008
–––, 2018, “Puzzle Pieces: Shapes of Trans
Curiosity”,
APA Newsletter on LGBTQ Issues in
Philosophy
, 18(1): 10–16.
–––, 2019, “Waste Culture and Isolation:
Prisons, Toilets, and Gender Segregation”,
Hypatia
,
34(4): 668–689. doi:10.1111/hypa.12498
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Bettcher, Talia Mae, 2018,
 “
‘When Tables Speak’: On the Existence of Trans Philosophy
”,
Daily Nous
, 30 May 2018.
Hale, Jacob, 1997,
 “
Suggested Rules for Non-Transsexuals Writing about Transsexuals, Transsexualism, or Trans
”.
Gender, Race, and Philosophy
philoSOPHIA: Society for Continental Feminism
Hansen, Jennifer, “Continental Feminism”,
Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2020 Edition), Edward N. Zalta
(ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/femapproach-continental/
>.
 [This was the previous entry on this topic in the
Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
— see the
version history
.]
Related Entries
aesthetics: existentialist
|
Affect Theory |
Africana Philosophy
|
Beauvoir, Simone de
|
colonialism
|
Cooper, Anna Julia
|
critical theory
|
Derrida, Jacques
|
disability: critical disability theory
|
existentialism
|
Fanon, Frantz
|
feminist philosophy
|
feminist philosophy, approaches: analytic philosophy
|
feminist philosophy, approaches: intersections between analytic and continental philosophy
|
feminist philosophy, approaches: intersections between pragmatist and continental philosophy
|
feminist philosophy, approaches: Latin American feminism
|
feminist philosophy, approaches: pragmatism
|
feminist philosophy, approaches: psychoanalytic philosophy
|
feminist philosophy, interventions: bioethics
|
feminist philosophy, interventions: environmental philosophy
|
feminist philosophy, interventions: ethics
|
feminist philosophy, interventions: history of philosophy
|
feminist philosophy, interventions: metaphysics
|
feminist philosophy, interventions: political philosophy
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on class and work
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on disability
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on globalization
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on power
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on sex and gender
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on sex markets
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on the body
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on the self
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on trans issues
|
Foucault, Michel
|
Heidegger, Martin
|
hermeneutics
|
Husserl, Edmund
|
identity politics
|
Lacan, Jacques
|
Latinx Philosophy
|
Levinas, Emmanuel
|
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice
|
Négritude
|
Nietzsche, Friedrich
|
phenomenology
|
postmodernism
Acknowledgments
The SEP editors would like to thank Dilek Huseyinzadegan, Jana
McAuliffe, Tamsin Kimoto, and Jennifer Hansen for helping us to
organize the team of coauthors who contributed sections to this entry.
We note their contribution and acknowledgments as follows. Section 1
(“Introduction”) is authored by Dilek Huseyinzadegan, who
thanks Jana McAuliffe and Marie Draz; Section 2 (“Themes and
Characteristics of Continental Feminism”) is authored by Jana
McAuliffe; Section 3 (“Black Feminist Thought”) is
authored by Jameliah Inga Shorter-Bourhanou; Section 4 (“Post-
and Decolonial Thought”) is authored by Selin Ege Islekel;
Section 5 (“Queer Theory/Queer of Color Critique”) is
authored by Marie Draz; Section 6 (“Trans Studies”) is
co-authored by Marie Draz and Tamsin Kimoto; Section 7 (“Asian
American Feminist Thought”) is authored by Erika Brown, who
thanks Tamsin Kimoto; Section 8 (“Conclusion and New
Directions”) is co-authored by Jana McAuliffe and Dilek
Huseyinzadegan. Authors also thank Sarah Lee for helping with editing
the penultimate version of the entry.