Dialectical School
First published Fri Aug 27, 2004; substantive revision Wed Aug 9, 2023
The ‘Dialectical School’ denotes a group of early
Hellenistic philosophers that were loosely connected by philosophizing
in the — Socratic — tradition of Eubulides of Miletus and
by their interest in logical paradoxes, propositional logic and
dialectical expertise. Its two best-known members, Diodorus Cronus and
Philo the Logician, made ground-breaking contributions to the
development of theories of conditionals and modal logic. Philo
introduced a version of material implication; Diodorus devised a
forerunner of strict implication. Each developed a system of modal
notions that satisfies the basic logical requirements laid down by
modern standard modal theories. In antiquity, Diodorus Cronus was
famous for his so-called Master Argument, which aims to prove that
only the actual is possible.
1. Historical and biographical information
2. The beginnings of propositional logic
3. Conditionals
3.1 Philonian conditionals
3.2 Diodorean Conditionals
4. Modal logic
4.1 Philonian modalities
4.2 Diodorean modalities
5. The Master Argument
6.The Reaper Argument
Bibliography
A. Greek or Latin Texts
B. Translations
C. Collections of Testimonies
D. Secondary Literature
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Historical and biographical information
The name ‘Dialectical School’ is used for a group of
philosophers active from the later 4th to the mid 3rd centuries BC who
are referred to as members of the Dialectic sect (
hairesis
)
or as dialecticians (
dialektikoi
) in some later ancient
sources (Diogenes Laertius [DL] 1.19). Together with the Megarics,
Cyrenaics and Cynics, the Dialecticians count among the minor Socratic
schools. Their main philosophical interest was in dialectical skill
and accomplishment, including the development and resolution of
logical paradoxes. They also made several important positive
contributions to the development of propositional logic.
The Dialecticians were traditionally counted among the philosophers of
the Megaric School, founded by Euclides of Megara, author of Socratic
dialogues (Grote 1885, 1:140; M. Kneale 1937; Mates 1953; Prior 1955;
W. C. Kneale and Kneale 1962, 117). In antiquity, the best-known
figure from the Megaric School was Stilpo, who, like Euclides, was a
native of Megara. For reasons that will become clear, scholars now
typically use ‘Mergaric’ as the adjective describing a
philosophical grouping or position, while reserving
‘Megarian’ as an adjective describing an origin in city of
Megara (the same distinction is marked in Ancient Greek). More recent
scholarship has placed Diodorus and Philo in a Dialectical School,
separate from the Megaric School (Sedley 1977, 75 followed by Bobzien
2011; Algra 1999, 47; Ebert 1991; Ebert 2008). In fact, disagreement
over the existence of a Dialectical Sect went back to
antiquity. Diogenes Laertius holds that the Dialecticians are a
separate ‘ethical’ sect, founded by Clinomachus, but tells
us that an earlier historian, Hippobotus, does not think the
Dialectical is a separate sect (DL 1.19).
But the modern scholarly reason for positing the Dialectical School as
separate from the Megaric School has four basic elements.
We should distinguish a ‘lineage’ (
diadoche
)
from a ‘sect’ (
hairesis
), which are the two main
ways ancient historiographers grouped philosophers. The first is the
genealogy of a philosopher in terms of teacher-student relationships.
The second is a ‘school’ in the sense of set of
philosophers with a shared core of doctrines, and some institutional
connection, for example a series of scholarchs. Everyone agrees that
Diodorus and Philo are in the lineage of Euclides of Megara.
There was a Megaric Sect, which included at least Euclides and
Stilpo of Megara.
There was a Dialectical Sect, identified by 4th and 3rd century
contemporaries, which was not just a phase of or part of the Megaric
sect. It included Diodorus and Philo.
The Dialectical Sect was one of the ten ethical sects identified
by Diogenes Laertius (DL 1.19).
(3) is the important claim for establishing that there was a separate
Dialectical School. Sedley defends (3) with the following argument:
Stilpo won over three students ‘from the Dialecticians’
(DL 2.114). Since Stilpo was a member of the Megaric School this must
mean that the ‘Dialecticians’ were a separate, and rival,
group from Stilpo’s Megaric sect (Sedley 1977, 75–76).
Some try to reject Sedley’s conclusion by admitting that the
Dialecticians were a group that was identified in antiquity as
separate from the Megaric sect, but the Dialectical group was not,
strictly, a sect in the technical sense used by ancient
historiographers. The is because the Dialectical group lacked the
required institutional framework, such as a succession of scholarchs
or core set of doctrines (DL 1.20; Döring 1989, 309; cf. Allen
2018, 44–46). But, of course, the Megarics also lacked such a
structure. On (4), the evidence that the Dialectical group is
identical to the Dialecticians mentioned at (DL 1.19), or even that
there was such a sect, is weak. Diogenes places the Dialectical sect
in a set of ethical sects, but no evidence attributes to any putative
member of the sect any ethical views (unless one holds that fatalism
is an ethical view). We can safely call Diodorus and Philo
Dialecticians in the sense of belonging to a distinctive philosophical
group, rival to Stilpo’s circle, but sharing a philosophical
genealogy with it. Whether this group was the Dialectical Sect, or a
sect at all, in the sense used by ancient historiographers, is less
certain because we do not know whether the members of the Dialectical
School were connected by an institution comparable to other ancient
philosophical schools, or whether their union under one name in later
reports was based more loosely on their common philosophical
interest in dialectic.
Those later reports give Clinomachus of Thurii, a pupil of Eubulides
of Miletus, as founder of the school, but may have been given this
title only in hindsight (DL 1.19 and 2.112, Sedley 1977 n.16).
Euphantus of Olyntus, another pupil of Eubulides, probably born before
349 BC, may have been the earliest member of the school. The name
‘Dialectical School’ is reported to have been introduced
by its member Dionysius of Chalcedon, active around 320 BC because of
the practice of putting arguments in question and answer form (DL
2.106; Castagnoli 2010, 157).
The most important philosopher of the sect is Dionysius’
contemporary, Diodorus Cronus, who taught in Athens and Alexandria
around 315–284 BC. He left no writings but is the most
influential member of the Dialectical School. Diodorus’ most
famous pupil is Zeno of Citium, founder Stoicism. The dialectician
Aristides belongs to the same generation as Diodorus Cronus. Alexinus
(c. 339–265) may have belonged to the sect. The second important
philosopher of the Dialectical School is the logician Philo (sometimes
referred to as Philo of Megara, although we do not know his city of
origin); he studied with Diodorus. He wrote a dialogue
Menexenos
and possibly a work
On Signs
and a work
On Schemata
. All of these are lost. Diodorus Cronus’
five daughters Menexene, Argeia, Theognis, Artemisia and Pantacleia
are all said to have been logicians, and thus may have belonged to the
school. Finally, the dialectician Panthoides flourished
c.280–275 BC, and the dialecticians Aristoteles and Artemidorus
can be dated around 250 BC.
Original philosophical contributions are testified only for Diodorus
Cronus and Philo, in the areas of logic, language and theory of motion
(for more on Diodorus’ contributions see entries
Ancient Atomism
and
Diodorus Cronus
);
 their views on logic were influential on Stoic logic, which in turn
anticipated many of the developments in 20th century logic.
Philosophers of the Dialectic sect had an impact also on Epicurean,
Peripatetic, and Sceptic philosophy, and seem to have interacted in
discussion with members of most Hellenistic philosophical schools.
Diodorus Cronus’ modal theory and his Master Argument served as
a major philosophical inspiration for
Arthur Prior
.
2. The beginnings of propositional logic
All we know about the so-called founder of the so-called Dialectical
School, Clinomachus of Thurii, is that he was the first who wrote
about predicates (
katêgorêmata
) and propositions
(
axiômata
) and the like (DL 2.112). Our evidence for
Diodorus and Philo confirms that they, too, conceived of logic as a
logic of propositions. It was the Stoics who systematically developed
a logic of propositions and devised subtle classifications of
predicates. (By contrast, Aristotle’s logic had been a logic of
terms, where subject and predicate terms were in principle
interchangeable.) The logic of the Dialectical School thus was a
precursor of Stoic logic.
At the time of Diodorus and Philo, a distinction between simple and
non-simple propositions was in circulation among the minor Greek
Socratic philosophical sects (Sextus Empiricus [SE]
Against the
Logicians
2.93–95). There is some dispute over whether this
reference is to the Dialectical School, or merely to dialecticians in
general (Ebert 1991; Barnes 1993). Following the Dialecticians, the
Stoics divided simple propositions into affirmations and negations (DL
7.68; SE,
Against the Logicians
2.93–95). Among
non-simple propositions, which were thought to be composed of simple
ones, conditionals, disjunctions and conjunctions were distinguished.
Disjunctions or conditionals featured as premises in many of the
logical paradoxes and sophisms which members of the Dialectical School
discussed. It is likely that Diodorus and Philo examined the
truth-conditions of all three kinds of non-simple propositions;
however, we know their views only for the case of the conditional (see
below
Section 3
).
Their treatment of conditionals and modalities implies that —
like most Hellenistic philosophers — Diodorus and Philo worked
with a concept of proposition that differs from ours in that it allows
truth-values to change over time. For instance, the standard example
for a simple proposition, ‘It is day’, does not contain a
covert fixed date or definite time determination; rather, it ranges
over times, changing its truth-value twice daily, all the while
remaining the same proposition. Thus we may think of propositions as
they were understood by Hellenistic philosophers as functions of time.
Diodorus Cronus can perhaps also be credited with the beginnings of
temporal logic, as both his theory of the conditional and his accounts
of the modalities are built on logically relevant temporal properties
of propositions (see below sects.
3.2
and
4.2
).
 Moreover, he distinguished between propositions in the present tense
like ‘Helen has three husbands’ and ‘These men are
marrying’ and propositions in a tense of completion (the
aorist), ‘Helen had three husbands’ and ‘These men
married’, and observed that it is possible for propositions like
the latter two to be true, without there ever having been a time at
which a corresponding one of the former type was true (SE,
Against
the Physicists
2.97–8). See Crivelli 1994; Duncombe
2023.
Apart from the various logical puzzles and sophisms, there are only
two topics on which we can be sure of a positive contribution to logic
by members of the Dialectical School. These are the positions of
Diodorus and Philo on the theory of conditionals and on modal logic.
Both topics involve notorious difficulties and were extensively and
intensely discussed by Hellenistic logicians; so much so that the
disputes became part of the general knowledge of the intelligentsia of
the time (SE,
Against the Grammarians
309–10).
Moreover, the theory of modalities was believed to have far-reaching
results for other areas of philosophy.
3. Conditionals
In the debate about the conditional (
sunêmmenon
) the
point of disagreement concerned the right truth-conditions of a
conditional (Cicero,
Academics
II 143). This controversy was
played out against the background of a common acceptance of what
counts as a conditional, and what its function is. Conditionals were
understood to be non-simple propositions containing one proposition as
antecedent and one as consequent. The antecedent has the particle
‘if’ prefixed to it; the standard form is ‘If
p
,
q
’. A conditional serves to manifest the
relation of consequence (
akolouthia
): it announces that its
consequent follows from (
akolouthein
) its antecedent (SE,
Against the Logicians
2.110–112). This relation of
consequence was also commonly taken to manifest the relation between
premises and conclusion in a valid argument.
3.1 Philonian conditionals
Philo’s criterion for the truth of a conditional is
truth-functional. Later in antiquity, it was generally accepted as a
minimal condition for the truth of a conditional. Philo maintained
that a conditional is false when and only when its antecedent is true
and its consequent false, and true in the three remaining cases:
whenever the antecedent is false, and when both antecedent and
consequent are true (SE,
Against the Logicians
2.113–114). Thus, the Philonian conditional is false only in
cases like ‘if it is day, it is night’, since when it is
day, ‘it is day is true, but ‘it is night’ is false
(SE
Against the logicians
2.115).Thus this notion of a
conditional comes very close to that of modern material implication
(Hurst 1935, 485; Heal 2022). (It is not the same, since truth for
Hellenistic philosophers is relativized to times.) Philo’s
suggestion is remarkable in that it deviates noticeably from the
ordinary language understanding of conditional sentences and requires
abstraction on the basis of a concept of truth-functionality.
Remarkable as it is, Philo’s view has the following two
drawbacks: First, as in the case of material implication, for the
truth of the conditional no connection of content between antecedent
and consequent is required. Thus a Philonian conditional will be true
whenever the consequent is true, for example, during the day ‘If
virtue benefits, it is day’ is Philonian true. Likewise, a
Philonian conditional will be true whenever the antecedent is false,
for example, during the day ‘if it is night, it is day’ is
Philonian true. This introduces a variant of the so-called
‘paradoxes of material implication’ (
Relevance Logic,
Conditionals
2.3; Lemmon 59–60, 82). The presentation of
Philo’s view in our sources shows that the ancients were aware
of this problem (SE, ibid. 113–117). Second, due to the
time-dependency of Hellenistic propositions, Philo’s criterion
implies that conditionals can change their truth-value over time: for
instance, ‘If it is day, it is night’ is true at night,
but false during the day. This is counter-intuitive as regards the
ordinary use of if-sentences. Moreover, as the concept of a
conditional was also meant to provide for logical consequence between
premises and conclusion, this leads to the problematic result that
arguments can in principle change from being valid to being invalid
and vice versa.
3.2 Diodorean Conditionals
For Diodorus, a conditional proposition is true if it neither was nor
is possible that its antecedent is true and its consequent false (SE,
Against the Logicians
2.115–117). The reference to time
in this account (‘was … is possible’) suggests that
the possibility of a truth-value change left open by Philo’s
truth-condition was one of the factors to be improved on.
We do not know whether Diodorus had his own modal notions in mind when
talking about possibility in his criterion, or just some
pre-technical, general concept of possibility, or whether he perhaps
intended to cover both (Denyer 1981, 39–41; Sedley 1977,
101–2). (The verb used here for being possible,
endechesthai
differs from the word used for possibility in
Diodorus’ modal theory, which is
dunaton
.) If one
assumes that he had his own modal notions in view when giving this
account (see
Section 4.2
below), his truth-criterion for the conditional stands in the
following relation to Philo’s: a conditional is Diodorean true
now if and only if it is Philonian true at all times. Diodorus has, as
it were, quantified the Philonian criterion over time. The conditional
‘If I walk, I move’ is now true because at no time is the
antecedent true and the consequent false. Thus for Diodorus, a
conditional cannot change its truth-value. If it is true (false) at
one time, it is true (false) at all times. If on the other hand one
assumes that Diodorus had some unspecified general notion of
possibility in mind when producing his account, the criterion will be
correspondingly less specific. However, it would presumably still be a
minimal requirement that it is never the case that the antecedent is
true and the consequent false.
Diodorus’ criterion bears some resemblance to the modern concept
of strict implication, although the exact relation between Diodorean
and strict conditionals is controversial (see Hurst 1935; Mates 1949;
Hájek 2009). What is clear is that Diodorean conditionals share
some disadvantages of strict conditionals, in that we encounter a
parallel to the ‘paradoxes of strict implication’ (Lemmon
1965, 153–4). As in Philo’s case, no connection of content
is required between antecedent and consequent. This time, whenever
either the antecedent is impossible or the consequent necessary, the
conditional will be true, regardless of whether there is any relevant
connection between the two constituent propositions. So for instance
‘If the earth flies, Axiothea philosophizes’ would be true
for Diodorus, since the antecedent was considered impossible (DL
7.75), while ‘If Axiothena philosophizes, virtue is
beneficial’ would be a true Diodorean conditional, since the
consequent was considered necessary (DL 7.75) One example given of a
Diodorean-true conditional, ‘If it is not the case that there
are indivisible elements of things, then there are indivisible
elements of things’ (SE,
Outlines of Pyrrhonism
2.111),
suggests that there was some awareness of these paradoxes in
antiquity. In any event, the Stoic Chrysippus developed a system of
relevance logic in which neither the ‘paradoxes of material
implication’ nor the ‘paradoxes of strict
implication’ occur.
4. Modal logic
Modal logic is the second topic where we have evidence about the
positions of Philo and Diodorus and their influence on the Stoics
(Kneale and Kneale 1962, 117–28; Bobzien 1993; de Harven 2016).
Although the modalities were generally discussed under the heading of
‘On things possible’, the Hellenistic modal systems were
each built on a set of four modalities: possibility, impossibility,
necessity and non-necessity. The matter of dispute was which system
was the right one; that is, which one adequately described the
modalities inherent in the world. In connection with this, an
extra-logical concern provided additional fuel to the debate: the
belief that if propositions stating future events that will not happen
all turn out to be impossible, the freedom and choices of individuals
would be curtailed. This is a variation on the problem of logical
determinism which is known from Aristotle’s
On
Interpretation
9. Several of the arguments devised and discussed
by the Dialectical School touch upon this issue — the Reaper
Argument, the Lazy Argument (Bobzien 1998, 78–81,
180–233), and the Master Argument.
For Diodorus and Philo, as for the Stoics the modalities were
primarily considered as
properties
of propositions or states
of affairs. There is no discussion of modal propositions, i.e. of
propositions that contain modal operators, such as ‘It is
possible that it is day’ or ‘It is necessary that virtue
benefits’, nor of iterated modalities.
4.1 Philonian modalities
Philo’s view on possibility has survived in several other
sources (Alexander,
On Aristotle’s Prior Analytics
184;
Philoponus,
On Aristotle’s Prior Analytics
169) but
only in one are his accounts of all four modal notions reported:
Possible is that which is capable of being true by the
proposition’s own nature … necessary is that which is
true, and which, as far as it is in itself, is not capable of being
wrong. Non-necessary is that which, as far as it is in itself, is
capable of being false, and impossible is that which by its own nature
is not capable of being true. (Boethius,
On Aristotle’s On
Interpretation
2, II 234)
So according to Boethius the basic feature of Philonian modalities is
some intrinsic capability of the propositions to be or not to be true
or false. That this feature is intrinsic is plain from the phrases
‘by its own nature’ and ‘in itself’. In one
source, both phrases are used to characterize Philonian possibility
(Simplicius,
On Aristotle’s Categories
195); hence both
phrases may have originally applied to all four accounts.
Philo’s notion of possibility is often thought to be a broad
notion of logical possibility (de Harven 2016, 3–4) with the
only constraint on a proposition being possible being that it is a
matter of logical consistency. Sometimes our sources seem to ground
this consistency in the intrinsic features of the subject of that
proposition. For example, according to Philo ‘this piece of wood
burns at the bottom of the ocean’ is possible, since the
intrinsic features of the wood give it the power to burn (Alexander
On Aristotle’s Prior Analytics
184.7–9;
Simplicius
On Aristotle’s Categories
195,30–196,
3), and, presumably, there is no logical contradiction in saying
‘this piece of wood burns at the bottom of the ocean’. It
is just that the extrinsic circumstances of being in the ocean prevent
the wood from burning (Bobzien 1993, 77). However, it is unclear
whether this explanation is wholly adequate, since
‘preventing’ is itself a modal notion, so this explanation
of the evidence risks circularity.
In all sources the concept of possibility stands out, and so it seems
likely that Philo built his set of modal notions on a concept of
internal consistency, as given in his account of possibility.
Philo’s modal concepts are thus defined by resort to another,
perhaps more basic, modal concept. As to the kind of logical
consistency Philo had in mind, we learn nothing more. Notwithstanding
this, there can be little doubt that Philo’s modal concepts
satisfy a number of basic requirements which normal systems of modern
modal logic tend to satisfy, too. (We assume here that Philo accepted
the principle of bivalence, as we have no contrary information.) These
requirements are:
Every necessary proposition is true and every true proposition
possible; every impossible proposition is false and every false
proposition non-necessary.
According to Philo’s accounts, a proposition that is not capable
of falsehood must be true; one that is true must be capable of being
true; etc.
The accounts of possibility and impossibility and those of
necessity and non-necessity are contradictory to each other.
This can be directly read off the definitions.
Necessity and possibility are interdefinable in the sense that a
proposition is necessary precisely if its contradictory is not
possible.
This holds for Philo’s accounts, if one neglects the difference
in the two phrases ‘in itself’ and ‘by its own
nature’ or assumes that originally both were part of all the
definitions. Then a proposition is not capable of being false
precisely if its contradictory is not capable of being true, etc.
Every proposition is either necessary or impossible or both
possible and non-necessary, i.e. contingent.
In Philo’s system this amounts to the fact that every
proposition is either incapable of falsehood, or incapable of truth,
or capable of both. The fact that Philo’s modal accounts —
and those of Diodorus and the Stoics — satisfy these four
requirements is of course no proof that the ancients consciously
reflected upon all of them or regarded them all as principles with
which their modal theories had to comply.
4.2 Diodorean modalities
We know a little more about Diodorus’ modal theory (in addition
to the passages cited for Philo, see Epictetus,
Dissertations
2.19, Cicero,
On Fat
e 12, 13, 17; Plutarch,
Stoic
Refutations
1055e-f). Still, again only one text reports all four
definitions of Diodorus’ modal notions:
Possible is that which either is or will be <true>; impossible
that which is false and will not be true; necessary that which is true
and will not be false; non-necessary that which either is false
already or will be false. (Boethius,
On Aristotle’s On
Interpretation
2.II.234–235)
Two of these modal accounts are disjunctions, the other two are
conjunctions. Provided that Diodorus accepted the principle of
bivalence, these definitions, too, satisfy the modal requirements (i)
to (iv) above, as can be checked easily.
Apart from that, Diodorus’ modalities are of a very different
kind from Philo’s. There is no modal expression hidden anywhere
in his accounts. Instead, which Diodorean modality a proposition has
depends wholly on the range of truth-values it has at present and in
the future. For example, if a proposition is always true from now on,
it is now both necessary and possible; if it is, from now on,
sometimes true but not always, it is possible, but not necessary.
Hence it is not the case — as is sometimes assumed — that
for Diodorus, every proposition is either necessary (and possible) or
impossible (and non-necessary). There are propositions that are
contingent in the sense of being both possible and non-necessary,
namely all those which will change their truth-value at some future
time. The proposition ‘It is day’ is such a case.
The dependency of Diodorus’ modal notions on the
propositions’ truth-values-at-times implies that some
propositions can change their modality from possible to impossible and
from non-necessary to necessary. For instance, if we assume that the
proposition ‘Artemisia is five years old’ is now true,
then that proposition is now possible; but it will presumably be
impossible at some future time, namely once Artemisia has reached the
age of six, since from then on it will never be true again (assuming
linearity of time).
We do not know what motivated Diodorus to introduce his modal
notions.
[
1
]
.
But we know that Hellenistic philosophers generally regarded
Diodorus’ modal notions as jeopardizing freedom, since they rule
out the possibility that something that never happens, or is never
true, is nonetheless possible. Thus, if ‘Dio goes to
Corinth’ is and will be false, then ‘Dio goes to
Corinth’ is impossible, and then, or so the thought went, it is
impossible for Dio to go to Corinth. In this context it becomes plain
why our sources stress the fact that something can be Philonian
possible without ever being true or obtaining.This is the relevant
difference from Diodorus with respect to logical determinism, the
point being that Philo’s modalities, unlike Diodorus’, do
not unduly limit the scope of contingency.
5. The Master Argument
Diodorus’ definition of that which is possible can be split into
two distinct claims: first that everything that either is or will be
true is possible, and second, that everything that is possible either
is or will be true. The first statement was not questioned by
Hellenistic philosophers. It is the second statement that was and is
considered counterintuitive and in need of justification; it is this
claim which Diodorus attempted to back up with his Master Argument
(Alexander, On Aristotle’s
Prior Analytics
183.34–184.6; Epictetus,
Dissertations
2.19).
Despite being widely known in antiquity, the argument has not come
down to us. All we have is one brief passage:
The Master argument seems to have been developed from the following
starting points: There is a general conflict between the following
three <statements>: (I) every past true <proposition> is
necessary; and (II) the impossible does not follow from the possible;
and (III) something is possible which neither is true nor will be
true. Being aware of this conflict, Diodorus used the plausibility of
the first two <statements> in order to show that (IV) nothing is
possible that neither is nor will be true. (Epictetus, Dissertations
2.19.1)
This is usually understood as implying that the argument was grounded
on statements (I) and (II), and had (IV), which is the contradictory
of (III), as conclusion; and this is about as far as the passages lead
us. But how did the argument run? There is a large and technical
literature on the Master Argument and this entry can only offer an
orientation to it. We can divide approaches into four groups along two
axes, an approach suggested by (Uckelman 2023, 246 [Other Internet
Resources]) and (Foster 2008, 21). The first axis is whether the
propositions in question are temporally definite or temporally
indefinite, particularly in premise (I). The second axis is whether
the ‘follows’ relation is a temporal succession relation
or a logical consequence relation, particularly in (II). Temporally
indefinite propositions are tensed propositions which can change their
truth value over time, such as ‘it is day’, a proposition
that is true once and false once in each twenty-four hour period. The
truth-value of the proposition depends on the time of the valuation.
Temporally definite propositions are such that there is an explicit or
implicit indexing to a particular time, such as ‘it is day at
noon on 31st October 2022’. Such a proposition is, as it were,
always true (or false): the truth-value does not depend on the time of
evaluation. In terms of ‘follows’, we might interpret (II)
as a principle that the passage of time does not affect whether
something is possible: once something is possible, it will not become
impossible. (Rescher 1966) and (Zeller 1882) take this line. The
alternative is to take ‘follows’ as a logical consequence
relation. In that case, (II) amounts to the claim that there is not
logical entailment from a possible proposition to an impossible
one.
Within that space of logically possible reconstructions of the
argument, a viable historical reconstruction must satisfy a number of
conditions. It must make use of the principles (I) and (II) handed
down in Epictetus; in addition to these, it must make use solely of
premises plausible to the Stoics; and it must appear valid. For we
know that different Stoic philosophers attempted to refute (I) or
(II), but we do not hear of anyone questioning the truth of any other
premise or the validity of the argument. Moreover, the reconstruction
must employ only the logical means and concepts available in
antiquity; in particular the notions of proposition, consequence, and
modalities used must fit in with the logic of the time, and it must be
possible to formulate the argument in ordinary language. Finally, the
restored argument should not have a complexity which precludes its
presentation at a social gathering, since it appears that people
enjoyed discussing the Master argument over dinner (Epictetus,
Dissertations
. 2.19.8).
Because of these historical constraints, most writers hold that the
Master Argument concerns temporally indefinite propositions and that
the ‘follows’ relation is a logical consequence relation.
This sort of approach was pioneered by Arthur Prior. (Prior 1955).
Prior’s reflections on Diodorus’ Master Argument go back
to his unpublished manuscript
The Craft of Formal Logic
(Markoska-Cubrinovska 2018). For an interesting recent comparison of
how Prior and Mates reconstruct the Master Argument see Corpina and
Øhrstrøm 2018).
We will offer here an informal reconstruction along the line suggested
by Prior, which has the advantage of being historically credible and
in keeping with the above constraints. The Epictetus passage suggests
that the argument was presented in terms of propositions and their
modalities, and so will the reconstruction. Other sources present
Diodorus’ modalities as modalities of states of affairs, and
alternative versions of the Master argument can be produced
accordingly. (The difference between propositions and states of
affairs is often blurred in ancient testimonies of logic.)
In line with Diodorus’ modal definition, the general conclusion
of the argument (IV) may be reformulated as
(IV′)
If a proposition neither is nor will be true it is impossible.
The first statement is less clear. It runs
(I)
Every past true <proposition> is necessary.
The Greek term used for ‘past’
(
parelêluthos
) is a standard Stoic expression for past
propositions, meaning not that the proposition itself subsisted in the
past, but that it is in some sense about the past. The principle
occurs also in Cicero, together with some explication:
All true <propositions> of the past are necessary … since
they are unalterable, i.e. since past <propositions> cannot
change from true to false. (Cicero,
On Fate
14)
From this passage we may infer that it was a peculiarity of all past
true propositions that they cannot change their truth-value to
falsehood; and that because of this they are necessary. This suggests
that the past true propositions at issue do not include all
propositions in the past tense, but that they were those propositions
which correspond to some past state or event. For instance, the true
past proposition ‘I went to Athens’ corresponds to the
event of my having gone to Athens. It can never become false, once it
is true. Assume that I went to Athens last month. Then the proposition
‘I went to Athens’ is not only true now, it will also be
true tomorrow, the day after, and in fact always from now on. The
truth of the proposition is based on the fact that there has been a
case of my going to Athens, and — whatever happens from now on
— this cannot unhappen. (One can bring out this feature more
clearly by reformulating the proposition as ‘It has been the
case that I went to Athens’). On the other hand, the proposition
‘You have not been to Athens’ does not correspond to a
past state or event. Suppose that up to now you never went to Athens.
Then the proposition is true now. Now suppose in addition that you
will go to Athens next week. After you have gone there, the
proposition ‘You have not been to Athens’ is no longer
true. Hence it is not necessary now. (This proposition cannot be
correctly paraphrased as ‘It has been the case that you were not
in Athens’). We may hence reformulate statement (I) as
(I′)
Every true proposition that corresponds to a past state or event
is necessary.
The second statement that functions as a premise in the argument
is
(II)
The impossible does not follow from the possible,
This was accepted by Aristotle and, with the exception of Chrysippus,
by all Hellenistic logicians. At least by the Stoics it was understood
as
(II′)
An impossible proposition does not follow from a possible one.
This amounts to the statement that if a proposition is impossible and
follows from some other proposition, then this other proposition is
impossible, too.
The following reconstruction assumes that, in addition to (I) and
(II), the argument rests on a couple of further principles, which
might have been generally taken to be valid and thus not worth
mentioning, or else which might have been generally accepted by the
Stoics and for this reason omitted by Epictetus. The first additional
principle is
(V)
If something is the case now, then it has always been the case
that it will be the case.
For instance, if I am in Athens now, then it has always in the past
been the case that I would be in Athens (at some time). This principle
gains historical plausibility from the fact that we find a version of
it in Aristotle (
On Interpretation
9, 18b9–11), and
that another version of it was accepted by the Stoics (Cicero,
On Divination
1.125). The second additional principle is
(VI)
If something neither is nor will be true, then it has been the
case (at some time) that it will never be the
 case.
[
2
]
This statement is based on the idea that if a proposition presently
neither is nor will be true, and you step back in time, as it were,
then the formerly present ‘not being true’ turns into a
future ‘not going to be true’, so that from the point of
view of the past, the proposition will never be true, and the
corresponding state of affairs will never be the case. (This is
assumed to hold at least for the past moment that immediately precedes
the present.) This principle has some plausibility to it. There is
some evidence that it may have been discussed in antiquity (Becker
1961, 253–5).
Next the construction of the argument: Fallacies and sophisms were
generally presented by means of an example which stands in for the
general case, and it is plausible that this was so for the Master
Argument as well, although other explanations for the name have been
offered (Massie 2016, 281n3). Overall, the argumentation then
proceeded as follows: you assume of a chosen proposition that it
neither is nor will be true; next, by employing (I), (II), (V) and
(VI), you deduce that this proposition is impossible. Then you
generalize the result to all propositions, since nothing in the
argument hinges on the fact that this particular proposition was
selected. A suitable example can be found in Alexander’s passage
on Diodorus’ notion of possibility and the Master Argument: the
proposition ‘I am in Corinth.’ The argument then starts
with the assumption that
(1)
the proposition ‘I am in Corinth’ neither is nor will
ever be true.
The conclusion to be demonstrated is that
(C)
the proposition ‘I am in Corinth’ is impossible.
By (VI) it follows from (1) that
(2)
it has been the case (at some time) that I will never be in
Corinth.
By (I) (‘all past truths are necessary’), it follows from
(2) that
(3)
the proposition ‘It has been the case (at some time) that I
will never be in Corinth’ is necessary.
But since necessity of a proposition is equivalent to the
impossibility of its contradictory (modal requirement (iii) above),
from (3) it follows that
(4)
the proposition ‘It has always been the case that I will be
in Corinth (at some time)’ is
 impossible.
[
3
]
Now, according to (V), it holds that
(5)
if I am in Corinth, then it has always been the case that I will
be in Corinth (at some time).
This is equivalent to
(5′)
the proposition ‘It has always been the case that I will be
in Corinth (at some time)’ follows from the (initial)
proposition ‘I am in Corinth’.
Now we can apply (II) (‘the impossible follows from the
impossible’) to (4) and (5′), and obtain as a result
that
(C)
the proposition ‘I am in Corinth’ is impossible.
And this is precisely what the Master argument was meant to show.
Moreover, this argument appears to be valid.
Where does the argument go wrong? The ancients went in for criticizing
(I) and (II), and one may indeed wonder whether (I) covers cases of
the kind to which it has been applied above. But there are also a
couple of things questionable with (V) and (VI). With a certain
continuum theory of time, it turns out that (VI) does not hold for
those cases in which the proposition at issue has started to be false
only at the present moment (Denyer 1981, 43 and 45). More importantly,
(V) and its variants seem to smuggle in a deterministic assumption. On
one or another of these grounds, then, one may attempt to hold the
Master Argument unsound, and so to reject Diodorus’ own account
of the possible as what either is or will be true.
6.The Reaper Argument
Like the Master Argument, the Reaper Argument emerged from the
Dialectical School and appears to argue against future contingencies.
Unlike the Master Argument, we have good evidence for how the argument
was formulated. Our main source for the detail of the Reaper argument
is Ammonius’ commentary on Aristotle’s
De
Interpretatione
9, in the 5th century of our era. But the Reaper
argument had a long history. Zeno of Citium, the founder of Stoicism,
paid good money for seven versions of the argument (DL 7.25 (part)= LS
31M=
SVF
1.279). Zeno learned the argument from an unnamed
dialectician. Usually scholars take it this to be a member of the
Dialectical School. DL 7.44 lists the Reaper alongside the Veiled Man,
the Horned Man and the No Man, and DL 2.111 gives Diodorus as the
author of the Veiled and Horned arguments. Aside from school
affiliation and the tenuous connection in DL, the content of the
argument has suggested that Diodorus may have authored, or at least
deployed, the Reaper as a companion to the Master Argument (Sedley
1977, 98; Seel 1993, 317–18; Bobzien 1998, 79–86; Sorabji
2014, 4–5).
The argument is recorded in several sources, but the most fulsome and
reliable account is in Ammonius’ Commentary
On
Aristotle’s On Interpretation
(131,20–131,33):
The more verbal one proceeds from some activity of ours, for example,
from the activity of reaping, in the following way: (I) if you will
reap, they say, it is not the case that perhaps you will reap and
perhaps you won’t reap, rather you’ll reap anyway
(
pantos
); and (II) if you will not reap, similarly, it is not
the case that perhaps you’ll reap and perhaps you won’t
reap, rather you won’t reap anyway. (III) But necessarily,
either you will reap or you won’t reap. (IV) So
‘perhaps’ has been destroyed, since it has no place either
in the opposition of reaping to not reaping (one of these occurring of
necessity), or in what follows from either of the hypotheses. (V) But
the ‘perhaps’ was what introduced the contingent. (VI)
Therefore the contingent is gone.
The overall structure of the argument is clear enough. The first stage
of the argument tries to establish that there is no place for the
expression ‘perhaps’ regarding the future. The second
stage connects the use of the expression ‘perhaps’ with
contingency. The argument then concludes that there is no contingency
regarding the future. The first stage has a dilemma structure, the
second stage could be seen as giving an argument from exhaustion:
there is nowhere ‘perhaps’ could fit in; perhaps is needed
for contingency; so there is no contingency.
The literature on the Reaper argument is not large. Sedley suggests
that the Reaper is ‘aimed at showing that it is never logically
correct to say “perhaps”’ (Sedley 1977, 98). For
Sedley, the Reaper aims to demonstrate some fact about linguistic
usage, namely that one cannot use ‘perhaps’ in a future
directed way. Sedley goes on to explain that it seems
self-contradictory to say ‘If you will reap, perhaps you will
reap and perhaps you will not reap’, but equally
self-contradictory to say ‘If you will not reap, perhaps you
will reap and perhaps you will not reap’. But bivalence commits
you to one or other antecedent. The only way out of the bind would be
to abandon the use of ‘perhaps’, at least in a sense that
expresses future-directed uncertainty.
Sedley’s suggestion is interesting, but Ammonius is clear that
the argument is supposed to rule out contingents, specifically, future
contingents, rather than make a point about linguistic usage. The most
in depth discussion of the sources and argument is (Seel 1993). Seel
does take the argument to be an attempt to demonstrate fatalism. He
takes the conclusion of the argument to be ‘it is not the case
that it is now contingent that you will reap and now contingent that
you will not reap’. Even if Seel’s reconstruction of the
argument is correct, it is not obvious that fatalism results. On
Seel’s reading, the conclusion is equivalent to ‘it is now
necessary that you will reap or you will not reap’. But that
leaves open which of the two options I will take: ‘necessarily
(p or not-p)’ does not entail ‘(necessarily
p
or
necessarily not-
p
)’.
The Reaper Argument certainly originated from within the Dialectical
School and argued for fatalism, but was Diodorus himself was the
author? Seel suggests that Diodorus was (Seel 1993, 137–38). One
difficulty with this attribution is that the notion of contingency in
the Reaper argument differs from what we know of Diodorus’
modalities from other sources. For Diodorus, a contingent proposition
is one that is true at some future time and false at some future time,
so each contingent will be realised. But the Reaper seems to entertain
contingents that are never realised. Premises (I) and (II) of the
Reaper both commit to the unrealised possibility that you will do
something. In the case of premise (I), if you will reap, then it is
not the case that perhaps you will reap and perhaps you will not: you
will reap anyway. So, the possibility that you will not reap will
never be realised. Likewise, premise (II) entertains the possibility
that reaping will never be realised. So the Reaper argument seems to
operate with a non-Diodorean notion of contingency.
Bibliography
A. Greek or Latin Texts
Alexander of Aphrodisias,
Commentary on Aristotle’s
‘
Prior Analytics 1
’, M. Wallies (ed.),
CAG
4.6, Berlin: G. Reimer, 1899.
Ammonius,
Commentary on Aristotle’s On Interpretation
9
,’ A. Busse (ed.),
CAG
4. 5, Berlin: G. Reimer,
Berlin, 1897.
Aristotle,
Categories and On Interpretation
, L.
Minio-Paluello (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1949.
Aristotle,
Metaphysics
, W. Jaeger (ed.), Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1957.
Boethius,
Commentary on Aristotle’s ‘On
Interpretation’
, second edition, C. Meiser (ed.), Leipzig
1880.
Cicero,
Posterior and Prior Academics
, O. Plasberg (ed.),
Leipzig 1922 (repr. Stuttgart 1966).
Cicero,
On Divination, On Fate, and Timaeus
, W. Ax (ed.),
Leipzig 1915 (repr. Stuttgart 1965).
Diogenes Laertius,
Lives of the Philosophers
, 2 volumes,
M. Marcovich (ed.), Stuttgart & Leipzig: B.G. Teubner, 1999.
Epictetus,
Dissertations and Enchiridion
, H. Schenkl
(ed.), Leipzig 1916.
Philoponus,
Commentary on Aristotle’s ‘Prior
Analytics’
, M. Wallies (ed.) CAG 13.2, Berlin: G. Reimer,
1905.
Plutarch,
Moralia
, i-vii, W.J. Paton, J. Wegehaupt, M.
Pohlenz et. al. (eds) Leipzig 1925–67.
Sextus Empiricus,
Works
, H. Mutschmann and J. Mau (eds)
Leipzig 1914–61.
Simplicius,
Commentary on Aristotle’s
‘Categories’
, C. Kalbfleisch (ed.)
CAG
8,
Berlin: G. Reimer, 1907.
B. Translations
Alexander of Aphrodisias,
On Aristotle’s Prior Analytics
I
, 14–22. tr. I. Mueller with J. Gould, London: Duckworth,
1999.
Ammonius,
Commentary on Aristotle’s On Interpretation
9
, tr. D. Blank, London: Duckworth, 1998.
Aristotle,
On Interpretation
, tr. J. Ackrill, in
The
Complete Works of Aristotle, The Revised Oxford Translation,
vol.
1, Jonathan Barnes (ed.), Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1984.
Aristotle,
Metaphysics
, tr. W. D. Ross, in
The
Complete Works of Aristotle, The Revised Oxford Translation
, vol.
2, Jonathan Barnes (ed.), Princeton: Princeton University Press,
1984.
Ammonius,
On Aristotle On Interpretation 9
, tr. D. Blank,
with Boethius,
On Aristotle On Interpretation 9
, tr. N.
Kretzmann, London: Duckworth, 1998.
Cicero, 28 Vols, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University
Press; London: William Heinemann Ltd., Loeb Classical Library.
On
Divination
(in vol. 20, tr. W. A. Falconer);
On Fate
(in
vol. 4, tr. H. Rackham);
Academica
(in vol. 19, tr. H.
Rackham), 1923–1942, Latin with facing English translation.
Diogenes Laertius,
Lives of Eminent Philosophers
, 2 vols,
tr. R.D. Hicks, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press;
London: William Heinemann Ltd., Loeb Classical Library: 1925. Greek
with facing English translation.
–––,
Lives of the Eminent Philosophers
,
tr. Pamela Mensch, ed. James Miller, New York: Oxford University
Press, 2018.
Epictetus,
The Discourses, The Manual
and
Fragments
, 2 vols, tr. W. A. Oldfather, Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann
Ltd., Loeb Classical Library: 1925–8. Greek with facing English
translation.
Plutarch,
Moralia
, 17 vols,
Stoic
Self-contradictions
(in vol. 13.2, tr. H. Cherniss), Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William Heinemann
Ltd., 1976. Loeb Classical Library: Greek with facing English
translation.
Sextus Empiricus, 4 vols., tr. R. G. Bury. Loeb Classical Library.
Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press; London: William
Heinemann Ltd., Loeb Classical Library, 1933–1949. Greek with
facing English translation.
Sextus Empiricus.
Against the Grammarians
, tr. with
commentary by D.L. Blank. New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1998.
Sextus Empiricus.
Outlines of Scepticism
, 2nd ed., J.
Annas & J. Barnes, (eds.), New York: Cambridge University Press,
2000.
Simplicius,
On Aristotle’s Categories
7–8,
tr. B. Fleet, London: Duckworth, 2002.
C. Collections of Testimonies
Giannantoni, G., 1983–1990, Socratis et Socraticorum
Reliquiae, 4 vols, Elenchos 18, Naples.
Döring, K., 1972,
Die Megariker. Kommentierte Sammlung
der Testimonien
, Amsterdam: 28–45 and 124–139.
D. Secondary Literature
Algra, K., 1999,
The Cambridge History of Hellenistic
Philosophy
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Allen, James, 2018, “Megara and Dialectic”, in
Dialectic after Plato and Aristotle
, Thomas
Bénatouïl and Katerina Ierodiakonou (eds.), Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 17–46.
Barnes, Jonathan, 1993, “A Big, Big D? Theodor Ebert:
Dialektiker Und Frühe Stoiker Bei Sextus Empiricus:
Untersuchungen Zur Entstehung Der Aussagenlogik. (Hypomnemata, 95.)
Pp. 347. Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 1991. DM
85”,
The Classical Review
, 43(2): 304–6.
Becker, O., 1961, “Zur Rekonstruktion des ‘kurieuon
logos’ des Diodoros Kronos”, in J. Derbolav and F. Nicolin
(eds),
Erkenntnis und Verantwortung
, Düsseldorf.
Bobzien, S., 1993, “Chrysippus’ modal logic and its
relation to Philo and Diodorus”, in
Dialektiker und
Stoiker
, K. Döring and T.. Ebert (eds), Stuttgart: Franz
Steiner.
–––, 1998,
Determinism and Freedom in Stoic
Philosophy
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Castagnoli, Luca, 2010. “How Dialectical Was Stoic
Dialectic?” in
Ancient Models of Mind: Studies in Human and
Divine Rationality
, A. Nightingale and David Sedley (eds.),
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 153–79.
Corpina, Fabio, and Peter Øhrstrøm, 2018, “The
Diodorean Approach to Time and Modality from a Historical and a
Philosophical Perspective”, in
Logic and Philosophy of Time:
Themes from Prior
(Volume 1), Per Frederik Vilhelm Hasel, Patrick
Blackburn, and Peter Øhrstrøm (eds.), Aalborg: Aalborg
University Press, 83–101.
Crivelli, Paolo, 1994, “The Stoic Analysis of Tense and of
Plural Propositions in Sextus Empiricus,
Adversus
Mathematicos
x 99”,
The Classical Quarterly
,
44(2): 490–499.
de Harven, Vanessa, 2016, “Necessity, Possibility and
Determinism in Stoic Thought”, in
Logical Modalities from
Aristotle to Carnap: The Story of Necessity
, Max Cresswell, Edwin
Mares, and Adriane Rini (eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
70–90.
Denyer, N.C., 1981, “Time and Modality in Diodorus
Cronus”,
Theoria
, 47: 31–53.
Döring, K., 1989, “Gab es eine Dialektische
Schule?”,
Phronesis
, 34: 293–310.
Duncombe, Matthew, 2023, “Diodorus Cronus on past and
present change”,
Journal of the History of Philosophy
,
61(2): 167–192.
Ebert, Theodor, 1991,
Dialektiker Und Fruehe Stoiker Bei
Sextus Empiricus. Untersuchungen Zur Entstehung Der
Aussagenlogik
, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
–––, 2008, “In defence of the Dialectical
School”, in
Anthropine Sophia:
Studi di filologia e
storiografia filosofica in memoria di Gabriele Giannantoni
, F.
Alesse,
et al
. (eds.), Naples: Bibliopolis,
275–93.
Foster, Caroline, 2008, “The Problem of the Perfect Agent:
Investigations into Determinism”, Master’s Thesis,
Amsterdam: Universiteit van Amsterdam.
Gaskin, R., 1995,
The Sea-Battle and the Master Argument.
Aristotle and Diodorus Cronus on the Metaphysics of the Future
,
Berlin, New York: Walter de Gruyter.
Grote, George, 1885
Plato and the Other Companions of
Sokrates
(Volume 1), 4 volumes, London: John Murray.
Hájek, Alan, 2009, “Two Interpretations of Two Stoic
Conditionals”,
Logical Analysis and History of
Philosophy
, 12 (April): 206–21.
Heal, Jane, 2022, “The Early Work of Martha Kneale,
Née Hurst”,
British Journal for the History of
Philosophy
, 30(2): 336–52.
Hintikka, J., 1973,
Time and Necessity
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 179–213.
Hurst, Martha, 1935, “Implication in the Fourth Century
BC”,
Mind
, 44(176): 484–95.
Kneale, M., 1937, “Logical and Metaphysical
Necessity”,
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
,
38: 253–68.
–––, and W. Kneale, 1962,
The Development of
Logic
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Lemmon, E. J., 1965,
Beginning Logic
, London, Edinburgh:
Thomas Nelson.
Markoska-Cubrinovska, Aneta, 2018, “Time and Truth in
‘The Craft of Formal Logic’: Prior’s Early Temporal
Semantics Born from Reflexions on Diodorus and Boole”, in
Logic and Philosophy of Time
, Per Frederik Vilhelm Hasel,
Patrick Blackburn, and Peter Øhrstrøm (eds.), Aalborg:
Aalborg Univeristy Press, 29–40.
Massie, Pascal, 2016, “Diodorus Cronus and the Logic of
Time”,
Review of Metaphysics
, 70(2):
279–309.
Mates, Benson, 1949, “Diodorean Implication”,
The
Philosophical Review
, 58(3): 234–42.
———, 1953,
Stoic Logic
, Berkeley, CA:
University of California Press.
Primavesi, O., 1992, “Dionysios der Dialektiker und
Aristoteles ueber die Definition des Lebens”,
Rheinisches
Museum für Philologie
(Neue Folge), 135(3/4):
246–61.
Prior, A.N., 1955, “Diodorean Modalities”,
The
Philosophical Quarterly
, 5: 205–213.
–––, 1967,
Past, Present, and Future
,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Rescher, Nicholas, 1966, “A Version of the ‘Master
Argument’ of Diodorus”,
Journal of Philosophy
,
63(15): 438–45.
Sedley, D., 1977, “Diodorus Cronus and Hellenistic
Philosophy”,
Proceedings of the Cambridge Philological
Society
(New Series), 203(23): 74–120.
Seel, Gerhard, 1993, “Zur Geschichte Unk Logik Des
Θερίζων
Λόγος”, in
Dialektiker Und
Stoiker
, Klaus Döring and Theodor Ebert (eds.), Stuttgart:
Franz Steiner Verlag, 291–318.
Sorabji, Richard, 2014, “The Three Deterministic Arguments
Opposed by Ammonius”, in
Ammonius: On Aristotle On
Interpretation 9 with Boethius: On Aristotle on Interpretation 9
,
David Blank and Norman Kretzmann (trans.), London: Bloomsbury
Academic, 3–15.
Zeller, Eduard, 1882, “Über Den Kyrieuon Des Megarikers
Diodorus”,
Sitzungsber Der Berliner Akademie
, 9:
151–59.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Uckelman, Sara L., 2023,
What Is Logic?
,
 unpublished manuscript, draft of May 5, 2023.
Related Entries
conditionals
|
Diodorus Cronus
|
doxography of ancient philosophy
|
fatalism
|
future contingents
|
logic: ancient
|
logic: modal
|
logic: temporal
|
Megaric School
|
Prior, Arthur
|
Stoicism