Dignity
First published Sat Feb 18, 2023
Dignity is a complex concept. In academic and legal contexts, it is
typically used in the couplet “human dignity” to denote a
kind of basic worth or status that purportedly belongs to all persons
equally, and which grounds fundamental moral or political duties or
rights. In this sense, many believe that dignity is a defining ideal
of the contemporary world, especially in western society. However, the
concept of dignity has long been associated with many more meanings,
some of which cut in distinctly different directions: rank, station,
honor, uniqueness, beauty, poise, gravitas, integrity, self-respect,
self-esteem, a sacred place in the order of things, supreme worth, and
even the apex of astrological significance. Some of these connotations
have faded with time. But most have enduring influence.
So, what exactly is dignity? Do its different connotations hang
together in any principled way? Does dignity understood as
“universal human worth”, for example, have any meaningful
connection to “social rank” or “personal
integrity”? Is dignity primarily a moral concept or a political
and legal one? Even assuming we can make sense of its different
meanings, what does dignity demand of us? What does it mean to
recognize or respect it? Does it ground rights? If so, which ones? And
where does the idea of dignity come from? What, in other words, is its
history?
This entry will take up these questions, but without any pretense of
being exhaustive. The goal is to provide a general guide to existing
theory and debate, with a focus on philosophical approaches to human
dignity, and mostly as it figures into the western tradition. The vast
literature makes anything more ambitious than this unrealistic, even
for an encyclopedic survey.
1. A Historical Primer
1.1 The legal history of dignity
1.2 Four Origin Stories
1.2.1 The revolutionary platitude
1.2.2 The Kantian platitude
1.2.3 The
imago Dei
platitude
1.2.4 The Ciceronian platitude
2. Formulating Dignity
2.1 Dignity’s defining properties vs. dignity’s grounds
2.2 Is a connection to rights a defining property of dignity?
2.3 Are distinctiveness and fragility defining properties of dignity?
3. Human Dignity: Touchstones of Analysis
3.1 Virtue, Value, Status, and the “distinctiveness” point reconsidered
3.2 Individuals vs. species
3.3 Inherent vs. constructed
3.4 Respect: An alternative lens on dignity
4. Skeptical Worries
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. A Historical Primer
In the opening sentence of its preamble, the 1948 Declaration of Human
Rights affirms the “inherent dignity” and “equal and
inalienable rights of all members of the human family” as the
“foundation of freedom, justice and peace in the world”
(UN 1948). This claim would surprise our modern ancestors. Until about
1830–1850, neither the English term “dignity,” nor
its Latin root
dignitas
, nor the French counterpart
dignité
, had any stable currency as meaning “the
unearned status or worth of all persons”, let alone the grounds
of universal rights or equality. Instead, in everything from
Hobbes’s
Leviathan
(1651) to Samuel Johnson’s
Dictionary
(1755) to Webster’s
Compendious
Dictionary
(1806), “dignity” was primarily used with
a conventional merit connotation—something like the “rank
of elevation” that Johnson officially gave it.
How did this sea change in meaning come about? The UN Declaration
makes clear that dignity’s moral-political meaning had become
normalized by 1948. But what happened before 1948 that explains this
transformation? These are not easy questions to answer. Although
theorists often include historical remarks in their inquiries, they
are just as often brief and subservient to some further,
non-historical point. The result is a great many half-told stories
about dignity’s past.
There are some notable exceptions. For some time, legal theorists have
been etching out the details of dignity’s historical role in law
and jurisprudence, especially in connection to rights. Second,
theological inquiries into human dignity often engage an older history
of ideas, especially the Renaissance thinker Pico della Mirandola or
scholastic debates about the biblical doctrine of
imago Dei
.
Third, there is a considerable body of literature on the Enlightenment
luminaire, Immanuel Kant, and his famous claim that humans do not have
a “price”, only a distinctive and incomparable worth or
Würde
—usually translated as “dignity”
(see, e.g., Korsgaard 1986; Meyer 1987; Hill 1992; Kofman 1982 [1997];
Wood 1999; Kain 2009). Let us turn to these various exceptions, and
their challenges.
1.1 The legal history of dignity
The connection between law and dignity strikes many as socially and
morally urgent. It is thus unsurprising that some serious history of
this connection already exists, especially in relation to rights
theory (see, e.g., Eberle 2002 or Barak 2015). Nevertheless, the bulk
of this history does not look back very far.
For example, Lewis (2007) gives a wonderful overview of the idea of
dignity in international law, but his focus is on the writing of, and
reaction to, the 1945 UN Charter and 1948 Declaration of Human Rights.
Or consider McCrudden’s impressive 2013 edited volume,
Understanding Human Dignity.
The historical chapters of this
volume make important contributions, but again the focus is largely
the twentieth century. Scott’s chapter (2013), for example,
begins by observing that the 1848 French decree to abolish slavery
motivates itself from the consideration “that slavery is an
assault upon human dignity (
la dignité humaine
)”
(2013: 61). She then nicely explores the idea of dignity in the
context of post-slavery Louisiana c.1862–96. However, the
chapter then jumps forward to a comparison with Brazilian society
c.1970–2012. Moyn’s chapter (2013) examines early and
middle twentieth century constitutional debates to show that the
concept of dignity labors under poorly appreciated debts to a
specifically Christian conception of democracy, and for this reason,
Moyn argues, we should be skeptical about the long-term utility of
dignity for secular rights theory. And Goos’s chapter (2013)
offers a close examination of the role of dignity in German thought,
but the focus is on post-World War II interpretation of the German
Grundgesetz
(Basic
 Law).
[
1
]
A longer legal history can be found in McCrudden (2008), whose concise
review of dignity reaches back to classical Roman thought. McCrudden
argues that we can trace the merit connotation of dignity as
“elevated social rank” to the Roman idea of
“
dignitas homini
” (2008: 656); but also, and
crucially, he argues that we can trace our contemporary
moral-political notion of the “basic worth or status of human
persons” to this same period, when Cicero introduced the idea of
“the dignity of the human race” (see also, Cancik 2002).
This claim about Cicero is echoed in Michael Rosen’s 2012,
Dignity: Its History and Meaning
, which is another important
entry into dedicated history that focuses on legal connections.
Rosen’s history is mostly from a bird’s eye view, but,
like McCrudden’s, Rosen’s history has the virtue of taking
a long view that stretches back to antiquity. Moreover, Rosen offers
some nuanced reflections on eighteenth and nineteenth century
connections, including Kant’s influence on the writing of the
German
Grundgesetz
.
Finally, when it comes to legal history, Darwall (2017) offers a
sophisticated analysis of dignity’s connections to western
Enlightenment conceptions of jurisprudence stretching back to the
sixteenth century. Importantly, however, Darwall’s history
challenges McCrudden’s and Rosen’s appeal to Cicero as a
key source. We will return to this scholarly disagreement and
Darwall’s competing proposal below
 (
§1.2.2
and
§1.2.4
).
1.2 Four Origin Stories
Given the present popularity of studying dignity, we should not only
expect the historical contours of dignity to become clearer in coming
years, but also for them to be occasionally redrawn. A few important
platitudes have already been challenged.
1.2.1 The revolutionary platitude
The western creed of human dignity stems from the wisdom of
eighteenth-century revolutionary thinkers such as Thomas Jefferson,
Alexander Hamilton, or Gilbert du Motier, the Marquis de Lafayette. At
the founding of new liberal states like America, or the reformation of
existing ones like England or France, political sages like these
propounded the inviolable value of individual human beings.
In reality, one looks in vain for dignity in the founding documents of
these new republics. The term appears a few times in the English Bill
of Rights (1689), but not with our contemporary moral-political
meaning. It appears once in the French
Déclaration des
Droits de l’Homme et du Citoyen
(1789), but the connotation
is of the privileges that attend public or political office. And for
all its fiery rhetoric about equality and the
“inalienable” rights of man, the US Declaration of
Independence does not mention human dignity at all. Nor does the US
Constitution. In fact, it is not until the Mexican Constitution of
1917 and the 1919 Weimer Constitution, that the term appears in a
constitutional context
possibly
with its moral-political
connotation (McCrudden 2008; Debes 2009 and 2017b). To this corrective
evidence, we should add the testimony of an entirely different set of
historical voices—from Sojourner Truth, David Walker, Anna
Wheeler, and William Thompson, to Susan B. Anthony, Frederick
Douglass, James Rapier, and Ida B. Wells—who remind us that the
revolutionary platitude was contradicted by the lived reality
within
these new republics. These voices decried the
systematic oppression and often bloody inhumanity that stained the
supposedly egalitarian societies in which they lived.
1.2.2 The Kantian platitude
The early modern concept of dignity originates with Immanuel Kant, who
in his 1785
Groundwork for the Metaphysics of Morals
, argued
that all persons have an inherent value, or dignity, in virtue of
their rational autonomy. This value commands a distinct kind of moral
respect, which we express by abiding by certain limits in our
treatment of others. Thus, Kant argued that we have a categorical duty
to treat persons always “as an end” and “never merely as
a means” (
Groundwork
, 4:429).
This is the greatest dogma about dignity in philosophy. But there are
good reasons to rethink it in favor of a more complicated history of
ideas. First, although it is well known that Kant is indebted to
Rousseau in various ways (see especially Beiser 1992), recent
scholarship suggests that when it comes to his ideas about
“humanity” and “dignity”, the debt runs deeper
than is generally understood (James 2013; Hanley 2017; Sensen 2017).
Sensen also argues that it is a longstanding interpretive mistake to
think that Kant
grounds
the obligation to respect others on
any “absolute inner value” that humans possess; and that
“dignity” is not the name Kant gave to such a value anyway
(Sensen 2011 & 2017; see also Meyer 1987). Relatedly, Debes (2021)
argues that contemporary philosophers have greatly overestimated
Kant’s influence on the historical development of our notion of
moral respect for persons.
On top of these corrections, Darwall (2017) argues that the conceptual
link between dignity and rights does not originate with Kant.
According to Darwall, only certain conceptions of dignity will support
the kind of inferences about respect that could justify using dignity
to ground human rights. Namely, those conceptions that render dignity
as a kind of authoritative standing to make
“second-personal” claims—that is, claims by one
person
to
another. However, the original insight for this
crucial point, Darwall further argues, comes from the natural lawyer
Samuel Pufendorf (see also Darwall 2012).
Writing a century before Kant, Pufendorf argued that human beings have
perfect natural rights (rights owed to one another) in virtue of a
certain moral “standing” that we assign to each other as a
constitutive part of being sociable. Whenever we address another
person directly—e.g., with a claim like “You must allow me
to speak”—we implicitly treat them as an accountable,
responsible being. Otherwise, why address them at all? And the same is
true when they address us. In other words, according to Pufendorf,
being sociable implicitly involves a
reciprocal
assumption of
basic moral status—us of them, them of us—whenever we
interact, and even if the address is one that offends the equal
standing of the other. Indeed, this is precisely when
“dignity” becomes most urgent. Thus, Pufendorf writes:
There seems to him to be somewhat of
Dignity
[
dignatio
] in the appellation of
Man
: so
that the last and most efficacious Argument to curb the Arrogance of
insulting Men, is usually,
I am not a Dog but a Man as well as
yourself
. (1672: I.VII.I [2003]: 100)
1.2.3 The
imago Dei
platitude
The moralized concept of dignity does not originate in the early
modern era. It was celebrated as early as the Renaissance, in Giovanni
Pico della Mirandola’s 1486
Oration on the Dignity of
Man
. Moreover, Pico’s oration is drawn from the older,
medieval Christian doctrine of
imago Dei
(based on Genesis
1:26 and Wisdom 2:23), which tells us that we are made in “in
the image of God”, and that this likeness grounds our
distinctive moral worth or status.
This story about dignity is to Christian theology what the Kantian
dogma is to philosophy. However, these claims are usually misleading
if not false. For example, Copenhaver (2017) flatly contradicts the
claim that Pico was talking about human dignity in a sense akin to our
contemporary moral-political notion. First, Copenhaver notes that the
title of the work, which draws our attention, postdates Pico (who
never published it). More substantively, Copenhaver argues that
Pico’s speech was a public failure in large part because it was
entangled with Kabbalah mysteries for how humans can escape the body
to
increase
their status by becoming angels. Finally,
Copenhaver points out that Pico uses the Latin
dignitas
only
twice; and
In neither case does
dignitas
belong to humans, except
aspirationally, and neither justifies “dignity” as a
translation, with all the Kantian baggage of the modern English word.
(2017: 134–5)
Adding to this reversal of fortunes, Kent (2017) marshals extensive
evidence from the scholastic tradition against the
imago Dei
platitude more generally. Although she confirms that both dignity and
the doctrine of
imago Dei
were widely discussed by medieval
Christian scholars in the Latin West, she convincingly demonstrates
that these discussions did not intersect in a way that supports an
inference to our contemporary moral-political notion of the
“basic worth or status of humans”. This said, not all
interpretations of the Christian tradition, including the doctrine of
imago Dei
, are beholden to this historical platitude. And the
imago Dei
line of inquiry on dignity has a somewhat different
life in the Jewish
 tradition.
[
2
]
1.2.4 The Ciceronian platitude
“Dignity” derives from the Latin
dignitas
. And
while most Romans used
dignitas
only in its merit sense, a
few, and Cicero in particular, had a proleptic understanding of
dignitas
that anticipated today’s moral-political
sense.
This historical view has attracted more attention lately, as evidenced
by its earlier noted endorsement in McCrudden (2008) and Rosen (2012a)
(see also, Englard 2000). However, it has been challenged on both
philosophical and interpretive grounds. For example, Miriam Griffin
(2017) carefully demonstrates that the textual support for this view
is very thin. She argues that straightforward lexical analysis of
Roman sources offers sparing evidence for connecting
dignitas
to our contemporary moral-political concept. Moreover, even if we
branch out to other ancient Roman concepts to see if dignity might be
hiding under different terminology, we run into a fundamental
challenge: “Stoics and Roman moralists”, Griffin explains,
“think in terms of
officia
, obligations or duties or
functions that our nature, properly understood, imposes on
us
”. Correspondingly, “[t]he entitlements and
rights of those at the
receiving end
of our actions is not a
prominent aspect of their thinking” (2017: 49).
Admittedly, Griffin allows that in some cases these obligations or
duties entail a kind of treatment of others that
accords
with
our contemporary notion of human dignity. Still, this result does not
depend on any right that persons have in virtue of “the worth of
a human being per se” (2017: 64; see also Meyer 1987; and Lebech
2009, especially p. 46 n. 22.)
To these challenges, Darwall (2017) adds another problem for the
Ciceronian platitude. Borrowing from the exact quotations that
McCrudden and Rosen use to defend attributing a moral-political notion
of human dignity to Cicero, Darwall argues:
Human
dignity for Cicero is nothing that could be established
by conventional patterns of deference. It is the idea, rooted in the
ancient notion of a great chain of being, that distinctive capacities
for self-development “by study and reflection” give human
beings a “nature” “superior” to that of
“cattle and other animals”. Other species are motivated
only by sensory instincts, whereas human beings can “learn that
sensual pleasure is wholly unworthy of the dignity of the human
race”, and be guided by this understanding.
[Consequently] nothing in the Ciceronian notion of human dignity
requires, or even leads naturally to, basic human rights. The
proposition, for example, that “sensual pleasure” is
“unworthy” of human dignity is less a thesis about what
human beings are in a position to claim from one another by virtue of
their dignity than it is an ethical standard to which we are to live
up. (2017: 182–3; Cicero quotations cited in McCrudden 2008: 657, and
Rosen 2012a: 12)
To be fair, Darwall’s critique hangs on two assumptions about
the concept of dignity: (1) that a satisfactory account of dignity
will involve a connection to, if not a grounding for, rights claims;
and (2) that dignity is in no way an achievement. Both assumptions
resonate strongly with contemporary moral-political talk of dignity.
Nevertheless, identifying these assumptions should remind us that we
have not yet clearly formulated a concept of dignity. So, let us turn
to that
 task.
[
3
]
2. Formulating Dignity
There is no single, incontestable meaning of dignity. In fact, there
are so many possible meanings that it has become commonplace in the
literature to worry about the expansive variety of conceptions, and in
turn to worry whether dignity is or has become essentially ambiguous.
And while its defenders find ways to mitigate or explain away this
ambiguity, the concept of dignity has its share of detractors. But we
will return to skeptical worries at the end of this entry. For now,
and granting the
prima facie
force of the ambiguity worry,
four broad categories of meaning stand out across context and
history:
Dignity as
Gravitas:
a poise or grace
associated with behavioral comportment; e.g., the sophisticated
manners or elegant speech of nobility, or outward composure in the
face of insult or duress.
Dignity as
Integrity:
the family of ideas
associated with living up to personal or social standards of character
and conduct, either in one’s own eyes or the eyes of
others.
Dignity as
Status
: noble or elevated social
position or rank.
Dignity as
Human dignity
: the unearned worth or
status that all humans share equally (either inherent or
constructed).
This “general schema” is rough and ready. Scholars divide
the conceptual space in different ways, often advocating intersections
between the foregoing four categories, making elaborations on them, or
noting wrinkles within them.
For example, Kolnai (1976) argues that the primary function of the
concept is descriptive, not evaluative. Dignity is a quality of
persons, which is the fitting object of a set of pro-attitudes related
to both moral appreciation
and
aesthetic appreciation. Thus,
to be dignified is to comport oneself in a way that is not simply a
reflection of authority, rank, moral uprightness, or a regimented or
serious adherence to codes of conduct, but instead reflects something
of “the beautiful”. As Kolnai puts it, our response to
dignity is characterized, at least in part, by “our devoted and
admiring appreciation for beauty” (1976: 252). Hence the
distinction between
(1)
and
(2)
above (see also Brady 2007).
By contrast, although Rosen (2012a) notes that the Latin term
dignitas
was once part of a critical vocabulary of classical
art and rhetoric, used “to characterize speech that was weighty
and majestic, in contrast to discourse that was light and
charming” (2012a: 13), Rosen largely blends categories
(1)
and
(2)
into a single strand of meaning, which he identifies as
“dignity as behavior, character or bearing that is
dignified” (2012a: 54). Rosen then accepts
(3)
and
(4)
but adds his own further category, which he calls “dignity as
treatment”: “To treat someone
with dignity
is…to
respect
their dignity” (2012a: 58). As we
will see more fully in a moment, this addition reflects a common
observation by scholars about a tight connection between dignity and
its recognition (although, it is not common to claim that the proper
recognition of dignity is a separate category of dignity).
Meanwhile, Kateb (2011) stresses the need to distinguish between human
dignity
qua
individual humans, and human dignity
qua
human species. According to Kateb, both have dignity. But whereas the
dignity of individuals can be described as a special kind of
“status”—as in category
(4)
above—the dignity of the human species requires a further
concept, namely, of “stature”. He writes, “In
comparison to other species, humanity has a stature beyond
comparison” (2011: 6). To be clear, Kateb does not think that
the human species has an existence above and beyond its members: it is
not a natural kind. However, he argues that the interdependence of
humans is,
so extensive, so deep, and so entangled…that for certain
purposes we might just as well make the human species a unified entity
or agency, even though we know it isn’t. (2011: 6)
Correspondingly, we can sensibly talk about the “dignity”
of the species. This conclusion cuts against some positions that
maintain dignity “proper” can only belong to individuals
(Stern 1975; Gaylin 1984; Egonsson 1998).
A more recent schema is offered by Killmister (2020). Killmister
proposes three “strands” of dignity: personal, social, and
status. To have personal dignity, Killmister argues, is to take
oneself to be subject to personal “dignitarian” norms. And
to have social dignity is to be subject to social
“dignitarian” norms. What are dignitarian norms?
Dignitarian norms are norms that either the person themself, or
society at large, take to be “ennobling” to uphold, or
whose transgression the person or society consider to be
“disgraceful or debasing” (2020: 25, 29). Like Rosen,
then, Killmister effectively blends categories
(1)
and
(2)
,
 while at the same time drawing attention to a different
organizational distinction one might make, namely, between the
personal and the social. As for “status dignity”,
Killmister argues that explaining this category of dignity requires a
distinctive concept of respect. And her argument is worth elaborating
because it exemplifies and fleshes out two closely related points
shared by many existing theories:
that any satisfactory theory of dignity must explain what it means
to
recognize
dignity; and
that this recognition is best described as a kind of
respect
.
So, consider: Dignitarian norms, according to Killmister, can
typically be redescribed as articulating the grounds of
respect—either self-respect (in the case of personal dignity) or
respect from others (in the case of social dignity). Moreover, the
kind of respect relevant to personal and social dignity, she argues,
is what Stephen Darwall (1977) influentially named “appraisal
respect”. This kind of respect is a positive evaluative
attitude
or
feeling
, which we express towards
ourselves or others, for some merit of character. In this sense,
respect is akin to esteem. Killmister writes:
to be highly personally dignified is to be such that, by our own
lights, we ought to hold ourselves in high esteem…to be highly
socially dignified is to be such that, by the light of our community,
they ought to hold us in high esteem. (2020: 23)
By contrast, Killmister connects status dignity to what Darwall
called, “recognition respect”. Recognition respect is a
way of
thinking
about oneself or others. To recognize-respect
someone (at least as Darwall first explained it) is to give
appropriate weight to some fact about them in our practical
deliberations, and to restrict our choices or actions accordingly.
Killmister thus argues,
We come to have
status
dignity, when we fall within a
particular [social] category, membership in which commands respectful
treatment from others in our community. (2020: 22)
She elaborates,
status dignity does not call on others to
esteem
us, but
rather to
treat
us in ways appropriate to the kind of thing
we are. (2020: 23, emphasis added)
Correspondingly, human dignity ends up as “an especially
important instance” of status dignity. And all humans deserve
recognition respect in virtue of the “fact” of their
membership in the category “human” (2020:
129–30).
This said, Killmister’s conclusion diverges from Darwall’s
own account of human dignity, which is tied to a revision he made to
his theory of recognition respect, which connected recognition respect
to the reciprocal “authority” of second-personal address,
as discussed in the earlier historical reflection on Pufendorf (see
§1.2.3
above; and Darwall 2006, esp. p. 14). Note also that Killmister, like
Kateb, eschews thinking of “human” as a natural kind, in
favor of understanding it as a social kind.
2.1 Dignity’s defining properties vs. dignity’s grounds
The previous section offered examples of how the general schema of
dignity’s meaning gets modified in existing theory, as well as
how each category of meaning might be fleshed out. More examples could
be given. But to decide between any of them, it seems crucial to ask,
how
should
we formulate the concept of dignity? In other
words, instead of simply cataloging first-order views about its
meaning, we need to introduce some second-order criteria.
On the one hand, we need to determine the
defining properties
of dignity: the distinguishing characteristics or explanatory demands
that are supposed to apply to any contentful account of dignity. Such
criteria might include, for example, that dignity is
“inherent”; that it is “incommensurable” with
other values; that it has a “distinctive normative
function”; that it has an essential connection to rights; and so
on.
On the other hand, we need to determine what
grounds
dignity:
we need to say what it is about humans, or any being with dignity,
that satisfies the defining properties. In other words, we need to
answer the question: In virtue of what do we have dignity? The most
common answer to this question, historically speaking, especially when
it comes to human dignity, involves a claim about autonomy. Or if not
autonomy tout court, then the “capabilities” for such
autonomy (see, e.g., Nussbaum 1995, 2006a, and 2006b). Thus, one
finds many variations of the claim that humans have dignity in virtue
of their capacity for (or exercise of) “choice” or
“rational agency”—claims that are often tethered to
the earlier discussed historical platitude about Kant. This said,
alternatives to the grounding question about human dignity include
brute species membership, sentience, the creative power of humanity,
creation “in the image of God”, a politically conferred
status as “rights bearer”, the capacity for empathy and
caring relationships, the earlier mentioned “personality”,
the concrete “particularity” of an individual person, and
the possession of “perspective”.
Sorting these views is not easy for a few reasons. First, some of the
operative concepts, such as “autonomy”, are themselves
hotly disputed. Second, there is no pre-theoretical reason to deny
multiple ways of satisfying any given definitional criteria. That is,
any given proposal for the defining properties of dignity might be
satisfied by more than one ground. For example, depending on the
criteria, humans might “have” dignity in virtue of both
autonomy
and
sentience, or both divine creation
and
our capacity for empathy, and so on. Third, twentieth century
theorists rarely took a second-order view on their subject and
methods. In turn, they often confused or at least failed to clarify
which of the two foregoing challenges they were trying to tackle,
articulating dignity’s defining properties or articulating
dignity’s grounds.
Thankfully, twenty-first century formulations of dignity are marked by
increasingly conscientious attempts to articulate the defining
properties of dignity, and to do so in a way that might guide
discussion about dignity’s grounds. For example, in
“Bedrock Truths and the Dignity of the Individual”,
Iglesias (2001) distinguishes between historically older,
“restricted” meanings of dignity associated with general
schema
(1)
,
(2)
, and
(3)
;
 and, on the other hand, what she calls “universal”
meanings associated with schema
(4)
,
 “human dignity”. She further argues that any satisfactory
universalist account must render human dignity as
(4a)
in some sense “inherent” or “intrinsic”; and
(4b)
the “grounds” of basic rights. Regarding the latter, Iglesias
writes:
The connection is essential. It is rooted in the concept of the human
person, in human self-understanding as constituted by the bedrock
truths about what and who we are…The universal meaning of the
concept of
dignity,
as inherent to every human being,
expresses the
intrinsic good that the human being is.
The
distinct
human rights
articulate those basic
intrinsic
goods
proper to, and expressive of, each one’s dignity,
individually and in community relationships—as dimensions of our
very being. These basic goods—guaranteed as rights—must be
recognized, respected, and promoted so that the intrinsic good that
the human being is himself or herself, personally and as an
individual, may be preserved and assured. Thus, the ground for
advocacy and defense of human rights resides on what and who the human
being is,
as
a human being, namely on his or her dignity.
(2001: 130)
By comparison, Shultziner (2007) adopts a
“philosophical-linguistic” method to distinguish
moral-philosophical uses of dignity from political and legal
“functions” of the concept, especially the use of dignity
to ground specific rights and enforceable duties. Regarding the
latter, Shultziner stresses that in real world contexts, the rights
which the concept of dignity is used to ground vary considerably:
There is no fixed and universal content that spouts out of human
dignity and, hence, its content and meanings are determined separately
in each legal document in accordance with the political agreement
achieved at the time. (2007: 78)
This might seem to express skepticism about the possibility of any
general, stable concept of dignity. In fact, it underlines the point
of Iglesias’s final criterion
(4b)
;
 namely, that a defining property of dignity is the grounding
connection to rights. In other words, strictly speaking, Shultziner
agrees with Iglesias that at least
one
defining property of
human dignity—in political contexts—is that dignity
grounds rights, even though the content of these rights vary greatly
because the grounds of dignity itself vary greatly.
[
4
]
Another example of second-order thinking can be found in Debes (2009),
who argues that any satisfactory “formal” account of human
dignity—by which he means an account of its defining
properties—must pick out a “distinctive” value or
status belonging to humans. And it must be distinctive in the sense
that it (a) is not merit based, but instead unearned; (b) is in some
sense “incommensurable” with other values; and (c) makes
sense of the basic “normative function” of the concept.
Regarding (c), Debes argues that the concept of dignity does not
purport to be only or even mainly descriptive. Instead, it has a
normative purpose or role, namely, “to
set off
in our
practical deliberations whatever ‘dignity’ is applied
to—to guard or protect what
has
dignity” (2009:
61–2).
Or consider Waldron (2012), who tracks a confusion in legal
discussions of dignity between (on the one hand) definitional claims
about dignity’s defining properties and (on the other hand)
claims about dignity’s practical conditions; that is, the
conditions of its moral, social, or political recognition. Thus,
Waldron notes the way that various human rights charters claim that
dignity is “inherent” in the human person; but also
“command us to make heroic efforts to
establish
everyone’s dignity” (2012: 16, emphasis added). Such
claims, he writes, may look like an equivocation akin to claiming, as
Rousseau once did, that “Man is born free but everywhere is in
chains”—a claim that Jeremy Bentham later called
“miserable nonsense”. However, Waldron argues that Bentham
missed an easy explanation of Rousseau:
[A person] might be identified as a free man in a juridical
sense—that is his legal status—even though he is found in
conditions of slavery…So, similarly, one might say that every
human person is free as a matter of status—the status accorded
to him by his creator—even though it is the case that some
humans are actually in chains and need to have their freedom
represented as the content of a normative demand. (2012:
16–17)
To be clear, Waldron quickly adds that one might shy away from the
specific premise of divine creation as a way of grounding human
freedom. That metaphysical premise is only an example. His overarching
point is that it is not incoherent to make this
kind
of
claim. Because the operative claim about the status of human
persons—namely, that they are free—is a claim about a
defining property of the concept of “man” (in a juridical
sense), it follows that we can distinguish this claim from any further
claim about what grounds this “free” status, as well any
claim about the worldly conditions that are required for this status
to be expressed, realized, or recognized.
Keeping this in mind, we can now understand why Waldron thinks that we
are not necessarily equivocating if we claim that dignity is
inherent
, but nevertheless enjoin others to
establish
it in practice. He writes,
On the one hand, the term [“dignity”] may be used to
convey something about the inherent rank or status of human beings; on
the other hand, it may be used concomitantly to convey the demand that
rank or status should actually be recognized. (2012: 17)
Importantly Waldron further argues that dignity finds its proper
conceptual home not in morality, but in the legal context of rights.
He writes, “law is its natural habitat” (2012: 13). This
is because, he argues, rights articulate, or flesh out, the kind of
status that modern conceptions of dignity typically include or allude
to; but also, which his own theory depends on. Thus, for Waldron, it
is historically mistaken and theoretically confused to ground our
contemporary concept of human dignity on thick metaphysical
bases—some inviolable value that “inheres” in
humans, whether by dint of divine creation or otherwise. Instead, on
Waldron’s view, the contemporary notion of human dignity is
essentially Samuel Johnson’s old idea of “elevated
rank”, albeit
refashioned
in the modern consciousness
to apply to all humans.
In other words, Waldron explains the historical revolution in our
concept of dignity as turning on a leveling
up
of all people
to the kind of social status once reserved only for the noble elite.
We simply reappropriated the term “dignity” to describe
this high status, ditching its original “sortal”
connotation for a new egalitarian one (2012: 57–61).
Furthermore, he claims that all this happened through (or mainly
through) the paradigm of rights. Oversimplifying for sake of argument:
Waldron thinks that people of lower social rank successfully annexed
the rights reserved to those of higher ranks, by reinterpreting those
rights as
human
rights. Hence why rights remain the critical
apparatus for fleshing out the kind of status relevant to
“dignity”, and why the proper home of dignity is law, not
morality.
Waldron’s view on dignity has been influential, so a few more
notes about it are fitting. First, in making these claims about
dignity-as-elevated-rank, Waldron partly aligns himself with Appiah
(2010), although Waldron does not seem to notice this. Second,
Waldron’s claim about the “home” of dignity is
contentious. It is
prima facie
hard to square with everyday
claims about human dignity, which seem evenly spread over moral,
political, and legal contexts. And it contradicts Shultziner (2007),
discussed above. Moreover, Dimock (2012), Herzog (2012), and Rosen
(2012b) challenge it directly, among others (see, e.g., Bird
2013).
Most important, however, in the greater context of discussing the
defining prosperities of dignity, it is to register Waldron’s
underlying suggestion about an “essential” connection
between dignity and rights. As we have seen, this claim finds wide
traction in the literature, even in accounts of dignity that are at
odds with the Appiah-Waldron view of
“dignity-as-elevated-rank”. For example, considering only
accounts reviewed so far, Iglesias (2001) made the same claim; Darwall
(2017) implies it; and both Kateb (2011) and Killmister (2020) endorse
it in different ways. This raises an obvious question: What exactly is
the connection between dignity and rights?
2.2 Is a connection to rights a defining property of dignity?
It is beyond the scope of this entry to answer this question in
anything close to a comprehensive way. (Good starting points include
Meyer and Parent 1992; Gewirth 1992, Carozza 2008 and 2013;
and Tasioulas 2013). Instead, let us draw out a few points about the
connection between dignity and rights as it bears specifically on
attempts to make it a defining property of dignity itself. To get at
these points, consider a final proposal about the definitional
criteria of dignity, from Fitzpatrick (2013):
The primary notion of dignity is the idea of a certain
moral
status
involving possession of an
inherent, unearned form of
worth or standing
—a basic worth or standing that is neither
dependent on one’s being of use or interest to others nor based
on one’s merits, and which essentially calls for certain forms
of respect. (2013: 5546)
Fitzpatrick presents this definition within the context of an
encyclopedic effort to capture its meaning. As such, he is
understandably aiming at something generic. However, in the light of
our analysis so far, the tensions in his attempt are manifest, albeit
instructive.
First, describing dignity as primarily a “status” instead
of a “value” aligns with those like Waldron, who make a
principled distinction between their accounts and all kinds of
“worth” or “value” conceptions of human
dignity (see, e.g., Killmister 2020, who emphasizes this distinction;
and Dan-Cohen 2012, for analysis on its import to Waldron).
However, Fitzpatrick immediately equivocates on this point, redefining
status as, “worth
or
standing”. Similarly,
consider that those like Appiah-Waldron who think human dignity
depends on a refashioned idea of high social rank, must, strictly
speaking, reject the property of “inherentness” that
Fitzpatrick appeals to. But they
might
allow for the
alternative description of “unearned”, especially if this
is interpreted as historically indexed to the refashioned conception
of status.
More important for the question about rights is to consider
Fitzpatrick’s final remark that dignity, “calls for
certain forms of respect”. At first blush, this appeal might
seem to be merely a refinement of Debes’s (2009) claim that
dignity has a distinctive “normative function”. If so, it
would be a refinement that is common to many theorists, as we already
noted in
§2.1
.
 However, Fitzpatrick immediately connects this generic claim about
respect to two specific elaborations of dignity’s normative
function. He writes:
It is in this sense [of an inherent worth or standing that calls for
respect] that many hold that all persons possess a fundamental,
inalienable dignity, which grounds
[1]
basic rights…or
[2]
the authority to make claims and demands of others. (2013: 5546)
Both claims merit elaboration.
The first
claim [1]
gives voice to the strongest, or at least the most direct way to make
the connection to rights a defining property of dignity, by making
dignity the
normative basis
of rights. Thus, suppose one asks
of any given right
x
, what justifies the claim that
“
x
is a human right”? The answer for those who
take this line is, “dignity”. Or at least, “human
dignity”.
Now, in one sense,
claim [1]
is unsurprising given that it has legal reality. For example,
although the claim is only implicit in the
Universal Declaration
of Human Rights
(1948) as well as the original
Charter of the
United Nations
(1945), a 1966 amendment to the
Charter
made it explicit, declaring that rights “derived from the
inherent dignity of persons”. Moreover, claims like this have
become increasingly common in state constitutions, especially in the
west, as well as other international charters and humanitarian
declarations (see, e.g., Schachter 1983, Iglesias 2001, Shultziner
2007, and McCrudden 2008, for summaries and analysis).
And yet, it is important to note that such legal claims are almost
always brute assertions. They are not conscientious attempts at
theory. More exactly, they do not claim that any adequate theory of
dignity (as a concept)
must
account for the grounding
relationship between dignity and rights. This is important because,
pace
FitzPatrick, or those like James Griffin (2008) who
adamantly stress dignity as the foundation of rights, some theorists
challenge or avoid or even reject
claim [1]
.
 This includes skeptics who challenge the viability of any existing
substantive accounts of dignity to ground rights (discussed later).
But it also includes some theorists who defend dignity (in one form or
other). For example, Waldron skirts around the kind of commitment at
issue in claim [1]. He allows that dignity involves each person
thinking of themselves, “as a self-originating source of legal
and moral claims” (2012: 60), but the overarching implication of
his argument is that rights
articulate
the nature of the
“high” status humans have been elevated to. Dignity is
thus not the normative
basis
of rights on his view. Instead,
legal systems, and rights in particular, “constitute and
vindicate human dignity, both in their explicit provisions and in
their overall modus operandi” (2012: 67).
Killmister (2020) follows Waldron’s lead, but she is more
explicit. “[H]uman rights”, she argues, “form part
of our articulation of how members of the human kind ought to be
treated” (2020: 143). And, like Shultziner (2007), she warns
against attempts to derive the content of rights directly from
dignity, a warning that further tells against making
claim [1]
part of the definitional criteria. Relatedly, Meyer (1989) concludes
that insofar as we aim to explain rights, we can never successfully
explain dignity: “While having and exercising certain rights is
important to our dignity as human beings”, Meyer argues,
what we commonly regard as essential to human dignity would not be
explained even if we were able to delineate all of the relevant rights
and the particular ways in which each of them expresses or protects
human dignity. (1989: 521)
Meyer’s point is enhanced (perhaps even preempted) by
Donnelly’s (1982) sociological claim that in cultures where
“rights” are or once were a relatively foreign concept,
human dignity is not. If Donnelly is correct, then excepting
motivational purposes, rights theory is arguably a non-starter for a
proper account of dignity’s defining properties (see also,
Howard 1992, who partly recapitulates Donnelly’s point).
Piling onto this, Schroeder (2012) and Moyn (2013) warn that the
“normative basis” version of the connection claim between
rights and dignity—i.e.,
claim [1]
—leaves
 dignity vulnerable, because our contemporary concept of human dignity
carries underappreciated debts to non-secular, theological traditions
(see also Addis 2013). And Valentini (2017) argues that the
plausibility of claim [1] depends on which other defining properties
of dignity we want to defend. Specifically, if dignity is taken to be
inherent, she argues, then claim [1] becomes not only
“uninformative” because “the notion of inherent
dignity is opaque”; it also becomes counterproductive to the
aims of most rights theories. This is because, she continues, the
inherentness claim pushes rights debates, “into deep
metaphysical waters”, and distracts us from the main political
function of rights (especially, human rights), namely, to
constrain, “the conduct of powerful actors” (2017:
862–3).
Now consider connection
claim [2]
:
 dignity grounds the
authority
to make claims in general.
Some have argued that the first connection
claim [1]
,
 which makes dignity the normative basis of rights, is ultimately just
a special case of the second claim [2], about authority. Perhaps most
well-known in this respect is Feinberg (1970 [1980]), who, in the
course of arguing that the act or practice of making interpersonal
claims is what “gives rights their special moral
significance”, adds this passing remark about dignity:
“what is called ‘human dignity’ may simply
be
the recognizable capacity to assert claims” (1970
[1980: 151]). Admittedly, Feinberg does not unpack the point. And it
is not perfectly clear if authority per se is part of his conception
of this “capacity”. Still, the point seems to resonate
with claim [2], especially if we pair Feinberg’s point with
Darwall’s views about second-personal authority, considered
earlier. Indeed, Meyer (1989) tries to unpack Feinberg in a way that
seems to anticipate Darwall’s view. (See also, Forst 2011, who
offers a similar line of argument to Darwall, which he credits partly
to Ernst Bloch. But see Sangiovanni 2017, who objects to both Darwall
and Forst, esp. pp. 50–60).
2.3 Are distinctiveness and fragility defining properties of dignity?
It is possible to take an even wider view on the defining criteria of
dignity. For example, consider Etinson (2020), who represents another
case of conscientious second-order theorizing. Etinson argues that a
complete theory of dignity should explain not only what
“grounds” dignity—“that is, how and why one
comes to possess or lose it”—but also its
“proper” method—that is, “how inquiry into all
of this should proceed and be understood” (2020: 356). The
latter demand is akin to calling for an articulation of the defining
properties of dignity, in the sense that we have been discussing.
However, Etinson adds an important substantive claim about this
method: He agrees that dignity is partly distinguished by something
like a distinctive “normative function”, but sharpens this
claim by suggesting that to explain this function, we should focus
specifically on the conditions of dignity’s violation. This
refinement is important for two broad reasons.
First, over its long history, inquiry into human dignity has often
been conjoined with considerations of what it means to harm dignity:
What constitutes disrespect of dignity? Can we lose it? Can it be
destroyed? And so on. Call this, the question of dignity’s
“fragility”. Sometimes, this question is taken up within a
direct examination of dignity (see, e.g., Kaplan 1999 or Dussel
2003). At other times, the motivation is pragmatic. For example, in
his reflection on legal appeals to dignity, Schacter (1983)
writes:
When [dignity] has been invoked in concrete situations, it has been
generally assumed that a violation of human dignity can be recognized
even if the abstract term cannot be defined. “I know it when I
see it even if I cannot tell you what it is”. (1983: 849)
And in some cases, these reflections go the other way around; that is,
from
an analysis of a specific kind of dehumanizing harm
(slavery, torture, rape, genocide; alienation, humiliation,
embarrassment)
to
dignity, or one of its close cognates like
“humanity” (see especially, Neuhäuser 2011; Morawa
2013; Haslam 2014; Frick 2021; Mikkola
 2021).
[
5
]
But whatever the context, it is crucial to distinguish between
first-order encounters with dignity’s fragility, and
second-order efforts that try to draw a connection between a negative
methodology centered on the question of fragility and the positive
effort to articulate the defining properties of dignity. It is the
latter claim that Etinson makes, illustrated in the following incisive
point:
Not all moral wrongs convincingly register as violations of human
dignity…And this suggests that dignity is normatively
special—that its violation represents a particular type of
wrong. (2020: 357)
Essentially, Etinson is arguing that (1) we should add to the defining
properties of dignity, that the value or status “dignity”
picks out is in some sense “normatively distinctive”; and
(2) in order to articulate (positively) what makes it distinctive, we
must investigate (negatively) what it means to harm it. Thus, for
Etinson, dignity does not simply have the normative function to
“set off” the special status of humans in our practical
deliberations; it sets off humans in a special way. And this
“way” can only be understood through a consideration of
dignity’s fragility.
The second reason for underlining this kind of negative methodology
comes from Killmister (2020), who also makes second-order claims about
the proper method for theorizing dignity. On her view, all the primary
senses of dignity in the general schema can be harmed in some way or
other. Each can be injured, lowered, embarrassed, humiliated,
threatened, frustrated, even destroyed. Correspondingly, it is a
criterion of any satisfactory theory, that it explains the nature and
conditions of dignity’s fragility in
all
its primary
senses
 (
categories 1–4
in the general schema).
The emphasis on “all” is important. Killmister’s
theory stands out for being an attempt to use the criterion of
fragility to offer a unified theory of dignity. And this raises a
question beyond whether fragility is a defining property of dignity.
Namely, for any given theory of dignity, does it purport to theorize
dignity in general, or
human
dignity in particular? Most
literature bearing the term “dignity” in its title will
say at some point that it is really or mostly about human dignity. But
if so, then are such theories in some sense incomplete? Must a
complete theory of
human
dignity
 (
category 4
in the general schema) reconcile itself with the other primary senses
of the term
 (
categories 1–3
),
 as Killmister implores?
The next section attempts to offer some footholds for answering these
new questions. But there is one more point to make here, because it is
pertinent to second-order questions about how to formulate dignity.
Part of what motivates Killmister’s effort at a unified theory
is an attending argument that theories of dignity should fit with
everyday ways of speaking about dignity. And everyday talk of dignity,
she argues, often refers to the other primary senses of dignity in the
general schema. Moreover, she claims that all these ways of talking
are connected by the fragility criterion, as well as some of the other
defining criteria we have discussed, especially (A) the idea of a
normative function and (B) an essential connection to respect.
Finally, she treats this “fit” between her account of the
defining properties of dignity and everyday talk about dignity as
important evidence for the correctness of her own criteria. Nor is she
alone in staking evidentiary value on fitness to everyday language.
For example, Bird (2013) and Etinson (2020) make similar
 arguments.
[
6
]
Do we agree? Surely, a good theory of dignity will not run roughshod
over everyday usage. Still, exactly how beholden should a theory
be?
3. Human Dignity: Touchstones of Analysis
The conclusion of the last section raised the following question about
the conceptual landscape of dignity research: Which of the many points
being made are relevant to theorizing dignity in general, and which
pertain specifically to human dignity? To answer this question, it
will help to distill a few enduring themes that characterize the
debate over specifically human dignity. These are hardly all the
themes that could be identified. Also, because each theme has been
introduced in one way or other already, the following is intentionally
condensed, with the understanding that any of these leads could be
followed into a forest of nuance.
3.1 Virtue, Value, Status, and the “distinctiveness” point reconsidered
One could take all the existing literature on human dignity and
arrange it into three groups, depending on whether any given argument
renders dignity as a kind of (i) virtue or quality of character; (ii)
value or worth; or (iii) status or standing. Our analysis already laid
out the most important aspects in deciding between these
classifications. We also noted that the trend in secular accounts is
to articulate dignity as a kind of status rather than as a virtue or
value. To this it should be added that virtue accounts make up the
minority of all modern positions, no doubt because most contemporary
positions eschew the hierarchical drift that comes with tying dignity
to virtue.
Perhaps less obvious in the literature, is the agreement to articulate
what is distinctive about dignity, regardless of which way it is
rendered: virtue, value, or status. This “distinctiveness”
point is pressing, given Etinson’s (2020) argument that a
negative analysis of dignity’s fragility is crucial to
understanding what is “special” about dignity as a
normative concept. On his view, a good theory of dignity will pick out
a “meaningful distinct set of concerns” (2020: 354), if it
is to justify using the term at all. The force of this point extends
beyond the question of whether fragility is a defining property of
dignity. But to appreciate fully why, we need to contextualize it. So,
consider the following:
The idea that human beings are morally special or distinctive has
found expression in the religion, philosophy, literature, and art of
all societies, modern and ancient. And connected to that idea and
those expressions is an enduring struggle to understand what this
peculiar “value” is. Since antiquity many have leveraged
this idea about human distinctiveness into the idea that humans are
supremely
valuable. The chorus in Sophocles’
Antigone
(c. 441 BCE), for example, lauds man as the most
“wondrous” of all things in the world, a prodigy who cuts
through the natural world the way a sailor cuts through the
“perilous” surging seas that threaten to engulf him
(verses 332 ff., cited in Debes 2009 at p. 52). Similarly, the
Judeo-Christian doctrine of
imago Dei
trumpets human dominion
over the earth and the distinctive value of humanity. Excluding God
and angels, the doctrine implies that humankind is preeminently
valuable.
Admittedly, these are not references to theory, strictly speaking.
However, the historical development of dignity has long been tangled
up with this kind of widespread attempt to explain human
distinctiveness, even if only implicitly or under cognate terms like
“uniqueness” (e.g., Muray 2007 and Rolston 2008). Indeed,
one might say that the most basic point of the
concept
of
dignity, especially as it was molded into the category of “human
dignity”, just is to describe the distinctive virtue, value, or
status of humans. From Cicero’s ancient claim about the special
worth of the “human race”; to Schacter’s (1983)
anti-Waldron argument that dignity’s importance outside of legal
contexts highlights the need “to treat it as a distinct
subject” (1983: 854); to Iglesias’s (2001) attempt to
explain our “distinctiveness” as human beings; to
Kateb’s (2011) claim that human dignity involves the unique role
humans have as “stewards” of the earth—in all these
arguments the distinctiveness point is in play. Or consider Simone
Weil, writing in the shadow of World War II, and who inspired
Iglesias:
There is something sacred in every man, but it is not his person. Nor
yet is it the human personality. It is this man; no more nor
less… The whole of him. The arms, the eyes, the thoughts,
everything. Not without infinite scruple would I touch anything of
this. (first published 1957 [1986: 50–51])
Similarly, Malpas (2007) explicitly argues that insofar as we are
investigating human dignity, it seems we are inquiring into what is
distinctively valuable about “being” human, by which he
means something like the
experience
of being human.
This said, we must understand Etinson as arguing that it is not enough
to claim that what explains the moral distinctiveness of humans is
their “dignity”. We have to say what about human dignity
itself
is distinctive. And we must do so in a way that would
substantiate (in part or in whole) the more general claim of human
distinctiveness. After all, Etinson argues, not all kinds of harms to
humans count as harms to their human dignity. Not even all harms to
their status are obviously harms to their human dignity. Slapping
someone in the face is certainly an affront to their status in some
sense, and perhaps even necessarily to their social-status dignity
 (
(3)
in the general schema), but not necessarily to their
human
dignity
 (
(4)
in the general schema). (See also, Valentini 2017.)
So, what is distinctive about human dignity itself? There is more than
one way to answer this question. Etinson’s own suggestion, as we
have seen, is to use a negative normative lens to articulate what
kinds of harms to humans count distinctively as harms against their
dignity. But rather than tracing out further particular answers to
this question, let us note a few final general observations about the
distinctiveness point.
First, most theorists of dignity do not explicitly parse out the need
to explain the distinctiveness of dignity itself, as contrasted with
human distinctiveness in general. However, I submit that explaining
the distinctiveness of dignity (itself) is often
part
of what
many theorists take themselves to be doing, however indirectly. In
other words, explaining dignity’s “distinct set of
concerns”, to use Etinson’s phrase, seems to be
constitutive of many theories of dignity. There is no space to
substantiate this contention here, but we risk losing valuable
insights about dignity’s distinctiveness if we don’t take
this charitable approach.
Second, it is important not to run together the normative upshot of
any claim about the
grounds
of dignity, with a
definitional
point about dignity’s distinctiveness. For
example, if one thinks humans have dignity in virtue of their rational
agency, then in one sense, this will entail
a
kind of
distinctiveness. For, it will necessarily inform the substance of
whatever rights or duties we think dignity justifies. In other words,
the content of such rights and duties will need to be
“distinctively” tied to rational agency, and what it means
to protect, harm, or nurture this agency. Likewise for any other
candidate account of dignity’s grounds. Nevertheless, this is
different than talking about distinctiveness as a defining property of
human dignity. Scholars like Etinson and Killmister are trying to
articulate the distinctive normative function that
defines
dignity, regardless of its grounds—indeed, which any
satisfactory account of dignity’s grounds must be able to
explain.
Finally, Debes (2009) adds the following qualification to the
“distinctiveness” point:
A proper account of dignity must pick out a distinctive value
belonging to humans. This is not equivalent to demanding a value that
belongs distinctively to humans.
The latter demand (which some theorists do insist on), not only
arbitrarily rules out a shared space of dignity between different
entities but also risks ruling out the best options for
dignity’s grounds:
For example, if rationality should after all turn out to be the most
defensible basis for a theory of human dignity, we [humans]
wouldn’t want to yield it simply because we discovered that
chimps and whales were rational or that Martians really have been
trying to communicate with us for millennia. (2009: 61).
3.2 Individuals vs. species
The conclusion of the last section brings to mind another theoretical
dividing line in the literature, between those arguing for human
dignity
qua
human individual, and those arguing for human
dignity
qua
species. Which is it?
Some say, both. For example, Kateb (2011) argues that we must explain
the uniqueness of persons
and
the species: “I am what
no one else is, while not existentially superior to anyone else; we
human beings belong to a species that is what no other species
is” (2011: 17). According to Kateb (echoing Cicero), humans are
partly divorced from the natural order both individually and
collectively, in virtue of possessing unparalleled and morally special
capacities for self-creation. Moreover, Kateb is clear that the
distinctiveness of human dignity also grounds human normative
supremacy. Indeed, on his view, human supremacy is one of the defining
properties of dignity: “The core idea of human dignity is that
on earth, humanity is the greatest type of being” (2011:
3–4); we are “the highest species on earth—so
far” (2011: 17).
Of course, such claims are contentious. But if we want to engage them,
it is important to be clear about whether we are doing so at the
definitional level, or at the level of dignity’s grounds. For
example, recall Cicero’s claim that it is in virtue of our
distinctive capacities for self-development “by study and
reflection”, that human beings have a “superior”
“nature” to that of “cattle and other
animals”. This Ciceronian idea about the grounds of dignity
shares affinities with many other extant views, including Kant, Pico,
and obviously Kateb. And we have considered reasons for rejecting this
line of argument. But even if one accepts it, the present point is
that one might
not
endorse Kateb’s claim about the
“core idea” of dignity being essentially about the human
species. That is, one could agree with Kateb about what grounds
dignity but disagree that part of what defines dignity, is the
property of species superiority. Stern (1975) and Gaylin (1984), for
example, agree that the concept of dignity is most essentially about
human worth or status, but argue that this does not imply that the
human
species
possesses dignity. It only implies that each
individual human has dignity.
Finally, any claim about the dignity of the species or collective
humanity must confront worries about speciesism, and in turn all the
objections of those who think that non-human animals have a purchase
on the normative space of dignity (see, e.g., Rachels 1990; Pluhar
1995; LaFollette & Shanks 1996; Bekoff 1998; Meyer 2001; Rolston
2008; Singer 2009; and especially Gruen 2003 [2010], who explores the
idea of “wild dignity”.)
3.3 Inherent vs. constructed
It is common to talk of human dignity as “inherent”. What
this means, however, is often unclear. Sometimes it is redescribed to
mean “intrinsic”, other times “inalienable”.
It is also often conjoined with claims that dignity is
“inviolable”—although this is dubious if
inviolability is supposed to be
entailed
by inherentness.
After all, one might agree that human dignity cannot be entirely
destroyed because dignity is inherent, but nevertheless allow that
human dignity can be harmed, insulted, frustrated, and humiliated.
This is not to suggest that all that is inherent is indestructible.
Whether human dignity can really be destroyed depends entirely on why
one thinks human dignity is inherent. If one thinks that human dignity
is inherent because we have dignity in virtue of possessing a soul,
then they probably do not think dignity can be truly destroyed
(although they may think it can be degraded; or even, if they
subscribe to Christian dogma, that it was in fact degraded by the
“fall” from grace). On the other hand, if one thinks that
human dignity is inherent because we have dignity in virtue of our
capacities for rational agency, then they probably do think dignity
can be lost or destroyed, whether by extreme psychological trauma or a
sharp blow to the head.
It must also be reiterated that secular theorists of dignity have
increasingly turned away from “inherentness” as a defining
property of dignity (see, e.g., Darwall 2006; Debes 2009; Kateb 2011;
Rosen 2012a; Waldron 2012; Valentini 2017; Killmister 2020). The
reasons for doing so vary. Most reflect suspicion about the
metaphysical baggage, especially of the theological kind, that
historically has gone hand in hand with inherentness claims. But there
are often other reasons. For example, for those that think human
dignity is defined by the authority or standing to hold others
responsible with second-personal claims, dignity only comes into
existence within actual second-personal encounters (see, e.g., Meyer
1989, Darwall 2006, Forst 2011, and perhaps Feinberg 1970 [1980]). Or
recall Valentini, who argues that the problem with the metaphysical
claims needed to back up inherentness is not simply that they are
“heavy”, but that they distract us from the core political
function of rights. Meanwhile, for those committed to a negative
methodology, like Killmister or Etinson, the starting assumption is
that dignity
can
be destroyed. And while this does not entail
that dignity is not inherent, Killmister persuasively argues that such
fragility strongly tells against inherentness.
All this raises the question: If not inherent, then what? The simple
answer is that on many theories dignity is socially constructed. Of
course, there are many theories about what it means for something to
be socially constructed, with many important differences between them.
There is, for example, a chasm of difference between claiming that
dignity is constructed as a constitutive part of second-personal
relationships (
à la
Darwall or Forst) and claiming
that it is constructed through the transformation of an old idea about
“elevated rank” (
à la
Appiah or Waldron).
So, the simple answer must be turned into a complicated one, which we
cannot do here.
3.4 Respect: An alternative lens on dignity
A complete theory of human dignity must articulate the demands that
dignity places on us, morally and politically. Some theories, as we
have seen, build this expectation into the defining properties of
dignity. But even when they do not, there is almost always some
appeal, positive or negative, to some claim about what it means to
recognize dignity, and most often to some claim about
respect
—which, furthermore, is usually claimed to be
both what dignity demands and what it means to recognize dignity. The
subject of respect, however, is its own labyrinth. It boasts an array
of meanings, diverse applications, and extensive commentary. This
said, two very general points about respect stand out in connection to
human dignity.
First, the connection between dignity and respect has been made
concrete in various political contexts. For example, Schachter (1983)
notes that Article 10 of the
International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights
provides that,
all persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated with humanity
and with respect for the inherent dignity of the human person. (1983:
848)
He marks a similar provision in Article 5 of the
American
Convention on Human Rights
(Ibid). And this connection generates
distinct challenges in the political context that reach beyond the
human rights discourse. Schachter explains:
In the political context, respect for the dignity and worth of all
persons, and for their individual choices, leads, broadly speaking, to
a strong emphasis on the will and consent of the governed. It means
that the coercive rule of one or the few over the many is incompatible
with a due respect for the dignity of the person. (1983: 850)
However, Schachter further points out, many political theories
contend,
that substantial equality is a necessary condition of respect for the
intrinsic worth of the human person…In particular, relations of
dominance and subordination would be viewed as antithetical to the
basic ideal [of human dignity]. If this is so, great discrepancies in
wealth and power need to be eliminated to avoid such relations.
(ibid)
The question thus becomes, how can we achieve such egalitarian
objectives, without the kind of “excessive curtailment of
individual liberty and the use of coercion” that human dignity
is
also
thought to eschew (1983: 850)? This question figures
into some of history’s most influential political theories, from
Hegel to Rawls. (For an inroad to understanding the Hegelian line, see
Honneth 2007; for the Rawlsian line, see Bird 2021.)
Second, as already hinted, the introduction of respect raises its own
distinctive challenge, namely, to explain what respect is. To do this,
many theorists appeal, explicitly or implicitly, to what we earlier
called “recognition respect”. When we make plans or choose
to act, we recognize-respect others when we appropriately take account
of some fact about them, by adapting, revising, or even foregoing our
plans and choices in the light of that fact. So, which
“fact”? Well, if we are talking about respecting persons
as
persons, in a moral sense, many theorists have answered
that
human dignity
is the operative fact. Or, if they drill
down further, then whatever they end up defending as the
grounds
of human dignity—whether rational autonomy,
species membership, an immortal soul, etc.—is the relevant
 fact.
[
7
]
However, the last few decades have witnessed a wave of new theorizing
about respect. And this has consequences for theorizing about human
dignity. The most notable consequence stems from the field of care
ethics, where empathy, compassion, and caring have been conceived as
distinct kinds of respect. Thus, although human dignity did not figure
explicitly into early formulations of care ethics, as conceived by
those like Noddings (1984) or Held (2006), care ethics has
increasingly been developed in ways that does bring dignity to the
fore, e.g., by those like Dillon (1992), Kittay (2005 and 2011), and
Miller (2012). Dillon, in particular, gives voice to a profound
alternative to rationalist paradigms of human dignity, noted
frequently in this entry, and associated especially with Kant. She
writes:
[Care respect] grounds respect for persons in something which,
considered in the abstract, nearly all human beings have and can be
said to have equally - the characteristic of being an individual human
“me” - a characteristic which each of us values and thinks
is both morally important and profoundly morally problematic not only
in others but in ourselves as well, and which pulls our attention to
the concrete particularities of each human individual. We are, on the
care respect approach, to pay attention not only to the fact that
someone is a “me” but also to which particular
“me” she is. (Dillon 1992: 118)
The core idea Dillon expresses here about the grounds of dignity
qua
the concrete “particularity” of an individual
person (as she puts it on 1992: 115), traces to Iris Murdoch (1970)
and Elizabeth Spelman (1978). It also resonates with the thinking of
Simon Weil, noted above in
§3.2
.
 More generally, Dillon’s argument illustrates how taking the
concept of respect as our starting point might lead to very different
views about human dignity.
4. Skeptical Worries
The conceptual complexity surrounding dignity has sparked a long
history of disagreement about the utility of the concept, with some
concluding that it is hopelessly messy or essentially ambiguous. One
of the more cited versions comes from the Yale bioethicist Ruth
Macklin, who made this complaint in a widely read 2003 editorial.
“Dignity”, she asserted, “is a useless concept. It
means no more than respect for persons or their autonomy” (2003:
1419).
Macklin’s claim was not backed by much argument. And judging by
the literature, her complaint did nothing to slow down the application
of dignity in bioethics, where it is now discussed in the context of
everything from disability studies, elderly care, human research,
cloning, “chimeras”, enhancement, transhumanism, and
euthanasia (see the bibliography for leads to each of these). Still,
one does not have to look hard to find Macklin’s allies.
For example, Rosen (2012a) claims that “animus against dignity
is widely shared among philosophers, in my experience, and goes back a
long way” (2012a: 143). He buttresses his claim by recounting
the encouragement of a colleague to give the concept “a good
kicking”, and by quoting his favorite historical challenges by
Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, the former of whom called dignity,
“the shibboleth of all the perplexed and empty-headed
moralists” (1840 [1965: 100] cited in Rosen 2013: 143).
Importantly, however, for Schopenhauer and Nietzsche, the problem
wasn’t simply the ambiguity of the concept. They thought that
the moralized notion of inherent or distinctive human worth garners
widespread credence only because it flatters our pride and allows us
to slip into self-deceptive moral complacency. This deflationary
hypothesis strikes at the heart of our modern dignitarian ethos.
So, exactly how widespread is skepticism of dignity? There is no
simple answer to this question because it depends greatly on what one
takes dignity to be. Even defenders of one conception of dignity often
express skepticism about other conceptions. For example, we already
noted the trend away from thick metaphysical claims about dignity,
which make dignity depend on anything like a divinely implanted
“soul” or Kant’s “noumenal” idea of the
self. Rosen calls such views, “internal kernel” theories,
and further notes that reservations about these views are often both
metaphysical (no such thing exists) and epistemological (we cannot
justify our belief in such things). The present point, however, is
that if one’s skepticism about human dignity in general turns on
the specific reservation about internal kernel theories, then one
should stay open minded. For, as we have seen, there are many
alternatives for theorizing dignity that do not depend on such
metaphysical commitments.
Still, because there is more than one way to interpret
Schopenhauer’s claim that dignity is a “shibboleth”,
it may prove helpful to trace out a little further a few possible
skeptical lines of argument, albeit briefly. So, here are four ways
skepticism tends to play out in the existing literature:
Rosen suggests that Schopenhauer’s main complaint
is that “dignity” is an impressive
“façade” obscuring the harsh reality behind the
idea, namely, that the concept lacks the substance to do the work we
assign to it. More exactly, dignity cannot serve as a foundation for
morality, including, serving as the normative basis of rights (Rosen
2012a: 143). We encountered this line of thinking already in the
earlier discussion of the connection between dignity and rights.
Essentially, the complaint is that no extant account of the
grounds
of dignity (e.g., Kantian rationalist arguments,
Judeo-Christian
imago Dei
arguments, etc.) can satisfactorily
explain and justify the kind of normative work dignity is supposed to
do. See especially, Sangiovanni 2017, who rejects Aristotelian,
Kantian, and
imago Dei
accounts of dignity as insufficient
for the tasks dignity is typically set to, including grounding
rights.
A related but distinctively different way of taking
Schopenhauer’s objection, is the worry that dignity has been
politically
manipulated to capitalize on its deceptive
potential. As Rosen notes, the general point here is not new.
“The idea that illusions are essential to the political
order”, he writes, “runs through the Western tradition of
political thought from Plato” (2012a: 144). However, Rosen
suggests that Nietzsche gets the credit for understanding how powerful
an illusion human dignity, specifically, can be, for such political
purpose. “Such phantoms as the dignity of man”, Nietzsche
writes,
are the needy products of slavedom hiding itself from itself. Woeful
time, in which the slave requires such conceptions, in which he is
incited to think about and beyond himself! (from “The Greek
State”, 1871; quoted in Rosen 2012a: 144)
In fact, this skeptical line goes back further than Rosen seems to
appreciate. Thus, in his 1714,
Fable of the Bees
, Bernard
Mandeville essentially made the same argument. Speaking conjecturally
about the origins of morality, Mandeville writes:
Making use of this bewitching Engine [of flattery], [the Politicians]
extoll’d the excellency of our Nature above other
Animals…Which being done, they laid before them how unbecoming
it was the Dignity of such sublime Creatures to be solicitous about
gratifying those Appetites, which they had in common with Brutes, and
at the same time unmindful of those higher Qualities that gave them
the preeminence over all visible Beings. (1714 [1988: 43])
Dignity is vacuous. Bracketing any worries about how any
given political institution manipulates the idea of dignity to achieve
its ends, or how human pride might capitalize on the idea of dignity
to facilitate self-deception about our personal moral failings,
perhaps the idea of dignity is simply unnecessary. For example,
consider the first sentence of Article One of the
Universal
Declaration of Human Rights
: “All human beings are born
free and equal in dignity and rights”. What would be lost, Rosen
asks, “if one were just to say, ‘All human beings are born
free and equal in rights’?” (2012a: 149). A slightly
different version of this complaint is that, because of its
vacuousness, dignity has become mere dogma. For example, in the legal
context, Theoder Heuss, called dignity a “non-interpreted
thesis” in law. And Costas Douzinas argued dignity was an empty
placeholder in a “hegemonic battle” of competing legal
ideologies (see also, McCrudden 2013a for some analysis of both; also,
Bargaric & Allan 2006).
Dignity is ambiguous. The thrust of this frequent
complaint is that dignity has become a useless concept, not so much
because it is empty, but because it has too many meanings. (A few have
even claimed that the concept is “essentially” ambiguous,
though it is not clear what this is supposed to mean; see, e.g.,
Shultziner 2007 or Rotenstreich 1983.) When focused, this worry comes
in three forms:
the ambiguity of meaning makes “dignity”
incomprehensible;
the ambiguity of meaning makes “dignity” susceptible
to abuse;
the ambiguity of meaning conceals objectionable subjective opinion
or substantive baggage in the concept of “dignity”.
Examples of all these positions can easily be found. But perhaps the
best illustrations once again come from the legal context. Regarding
(1)
:
 see, e.g., Bates (2005), who acknowledges the problem but then tries
to defend dignity. Regarding
(2)
:
 see, e.g., Gearty (2014) and Moyn (2013), who argue that the
continuing ambiguity of dignity make it too easily abused in courtroom
deliberation and democratic theories of rights. Regarding
(3)
:
 see Pinker (2008), who argues that dignity is a subjective
phenomenon, “relative, fungible, and often harmful”; also
Rosen (2012a) and Moyn (2013), both of whom argue that our modern
concept labors under underappreciated debts to Christian theology;
These are not all the possible reasons for skepticism about dignity,
only the most prevalent. And each is usually sharpened in various ways
that make the argument cut deeper than what this summary suggests.
This said, the merits of these critiques are disputable. Indeed, much
of the foregoing analysis in this entry suggests strategies of
response to each.
But perhaps the most fitting way to conclude is with a different kind
of question entirely. Namely, how
ought
we respond to such
skeptical attacks, if at all? Thus, it is hard not to think of
Frederick Douglass’s warning, delivered in his 1852
“Fourth of July” speech, about the dangers of demanding of
anyone, that they
argue
for their equal and basic human worth
or status—especially when so many people remain not simply
oppressed, but exposed to vitriolic hate in a world that constantly
proclaims its faith and commitment in the ideal of human dignity.
“At a time like this”, Douglass said, “scorching
irony, not convincing argument, is needed” (1852: 20).
Bibliography
Addis, Adeno, 2013, “The Role of Human Dignity in a World of
Plural Values and Ethical Commitments”,
Netherlands
Quarterly of Human Rights
, 31(4): 403–444.
doi:10.1177/016934411303100403
Ammicht-Quinn, Regina, Maureen Junker-Kenny, and Elsa Tamez (eds),
2003,
The Discourse of Human Dignity
, (Concilium 2003/2),
London: SCM Press.
Annas, George J., 2004, “American Bioethics and Human
Rights: The End of All Our Exploring”,
Journal of Law,
Medicine & Ethics
, 32(4): 658–663.
doi:10.1111/j.1748-720X.2004.tb01970.x
Appiah, Anthony, 2010,
The Honor Code: How Moral Revolutions
Happen
, New York: W.W. Norton.
Bagaric, Mirko and James Allan, 2006, “The Vacuous Concept
of Dignity”,
Journal of Human Rights
, 5(2):
257–270. doi:10.1080/14754830600653603
Barak, Aharon, 2015,
Human Dignity: The Constitutional Value
and the Constitutional Right
, Daniel Kayros (trans.), Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781316106327
Bates, Justin, 2005, “Human Dignity — An Empty Phrase
in Search of Meaning?”,
Judicial Review
, 10(2):
165–168. doi:10.1080/10854681.2005.11426430
Bayer, Oswald, 2014, “Martin Luther’s Conception of Human
Dignity,” in Düwell et. al. 2014: 101–107.
Beattie, Tina, 2013, “The Vanishing Absolute and the
Deconsecrated God: A Theological Reflection on Revelation, Law, and
Human Dignity”, in McCrudden 2013b: 259–274 (ch. 14).
Beiser, Frederick C., 1992, “Kant’s Intellectual
Development: 1746–1781”, in
The Cambridge Companion to
Kant
, Paul Guyer (ed.), Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University
Press, 26–61. doi:10.1017/CCOL0521365872.002
Beitz, Charles R., 2013, “Human Dignity in the Theory of
Human Rights: Nothing But a Phrase?: Human Dignity in the Theory of
Human Rights: Nothing But a Phrase?”,
Philosophy and Public
Affairs
, 41(3): 259–290. doi:10.1111/papa.12017
Bekoff, Marc, 1998, “Resisting Speciesism and Expanding the
Community of Equals”,
BioScience
, 48(8): 638–641.
doi:10.2307/1313423
Bird, Colin, 2013, “Dignity as a Moral Concept”,
Social
Philosophy and Policy
, 30(1-2): 150–176.
–––, 2021,
Human Dignity and Political
Criticism
, Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/9781108937597
Birnbacher, Dieter, 2005, “Human Cloning and Human
Dignity”,
Reproductive BioMedicine Online
, 10(sup 1):
50–55. doi:10.1016/S1472-6483(10)62206-7
Bostrom, Nick, 2005, “In Defense of Posthuman
Dignity”,
Bioethics
, 19(3): 202–214.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8519.2005.00437.x
–––, 2008, “Dignity and
Enhancement”, in President’s Council on Bioethics 2008:
173–206 (ch. 8).
 [
Bostrom 2008 available online
]
Boxill, Bernard, 2017, “Sympathy and Dignity in Early
Africana Philosophy”, in Debes 2017a: 333–359 (ch.
11).
Braarvig, Jens, 2014a, “Buddhism: Inner Dignity and Absolute
Altruism”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 170–176 (ch. 16).
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.020
–––, 2014b, “Hinduism: The Universal Self
in a Class Society”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 163–169
(ch. 15). doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.019
Brady, Veronica, 2007, “The Question of Dignity: Doubts and
Loves and a Whisper from Where the Ruined House Once Stood”, in
Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 119–126.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_10
Buchanan, Allen E., 2009, “Moral Status and Human
Enhancement”,
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 37(4):
346–381. doi:10.1111/j.1088-4963.2009.01166.x
–––, 2011,
Beyond Humanity? The Ethics of
Biomedical Enhancement
, (Uehiro Series in Practical Ethics),
Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199587810.001.0001
Burns, Lawrence, 2008, “What Is the Scope for the
Interpretation of Dignity in Research Involving Human
Subjects?”,
Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy
,
11(2): 191–208. doi:10.1007/s11019-007-9107-x
Burrow, Rufus, Jr., 2006,
God and Human Dignity: The
Personalism, Theology, and Ethics of Martin Luther King, Jr.
,
Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada, Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada [TCPS], 2014, “Tri-Council Policy
Statement 2: Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans”.
 [
TCPS 2014 available online
]
Cancik, Hubert, 2002, “‘Dignity of Man’ and
‘
Persona
’ in Stoic Anthropology: Some Remarks on
Cicero,
De Officiis
I, 105–107”,
in
The Concept of Human Dignity in Human Rights
Discourse,
David Kretzmer and Eckart Klein (eds), The Hauge:
Kluwer Law International, 19–39.
doi:0.1163/9789004478190_003
Carozza, Paolo, 2008, “Human Dignity and Judicial
Interpretation of Human Rights: A Reply”,
European Journal of
International Law
, 19(5): 931–944. doi:10.1093/ejil/chn059
–––, 2013, “Human Rights, Human Dignity,
and Human Experience”, in McCrudden 2013: 615–630 (ch. 37).
Caulfield, Timothy and Roger Brownsword, 2006, “Human
Dignity: A Guide to Policy Making in the Biotechnology Era?”,
Nature Reviews Genetics
, 7(1): 72–76.
doi:10.1038/nrg1744
Clark, Gillian and Tessa Rajak (eds), 2002,
Philosophy and
Power in the Graeco-Roman World: Essays in Honour of Miriam
Griffin
, Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198299905.001.0001
Copenhaver, Brian, 2017, “Dignity, Vile Bodies, and
Nakedness: Giovanni Pivo and Giannozzo Manetti”, in Debes 2017a:
127–173 (ch. 5).
Dalton, James S., 1999, “Human Dignity, Human Rights, and
Ecology: Christian, Buddhist, and Native American Perspectives”,
in
Made in God’s Image: The Catholic Vision of Human
Dignity
, Regis Duffy and Angelus Gambatese (eds), New
York/Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press, 29–54.
Dan-Cohen, Meir, 2012, “Introduction”, in Waldron
2012: 3–13.
Darwall, Stephen L., 1977, “Two Kinds of Respect”,
Ethics
, 88(1): 36–49. doi:10.1086/292054
–––, 1999, “Sympathetic Liberalism: Recent
Work on Adam Smith”,
Philosophy & Public Affairs
,
28(2): 139–164. doi:10.1111/j.1088-4963.1999.00139.x
–––, 2006,
The Second-Person Standpoint:
Morality, Respect and Accountability
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
–––, 2012, “Pufendorf on Morality,
Sociability, and Moral Powers”,
Journal of the History of
Philosophy
, 50(2): 213–238. doi:10.1353/hph.2012.0024
–––, 2013, “Respect as Honor and as
Accountability”, in his
Honor, History, and Relationship:
Essays in Second-Personal Ethics II
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 11–29. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199662609.003.0002
–––, 2017, “Equal Dignity and
Rights”, in Debes 2017a: 181–201 (ch. 6).
De Melo-Martín, Inmaculada, 2008, “Chimeras and Human
Dignity”,
Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal
, 18(4):
331–346. doi:10.1353/ken.0.0268
–––, 2010, “Human Dignity, Transhuman
Dignity, and All That Jazz”,
The American Journal of
Bioethics
, 10(7): 53–55. doi:10.1080/15265161003686530
Debes, Remy, 2009, “Dignity’s Gauntlet”,
Philosophical Perspectives
, 23: 45–78.
doi:10.1111/j.1520-8583.2009.00161.x
–––, 2012, “Adam Smith on Dignity and
Equality”,
British Journal for the History of
Philosophy
, 20(1): 109–140.
doi:10.1080/09608788.2011.651315
––– (ed.), 2017a,
Dignity: A History
,
(Oxford Philosophical Concepts), New York, NY: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199385997.001.0001
–––, Debes, Remy, 2017b, “Introduction”, in
Debes 2017a: 1–19. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199385997.003.0001
–––, 2017c, “Human Dignity Before Kant:
Denis Diderot’s Passionate Person”, in Debes 2017a:
203–235 (ch. 7).
–––, 2017d, “The Authority of Empathy (Or,
How to Ground Sentimentalism)”, in
Ethical Sentimentalism:
New Perspectives
, Remy Debes and Karsten Stueber (eds),
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 153–170 (ch. 9).
doi:10.1017/9781316105672.010
–––, 2021, “Respect: A History”, in
Respect: Philosophical Essays
, Richard Dean and Oliver Sensen
(eds), Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press, 1–28.
DeGrazia, David, 2007, “Human-Animal Chimeras: Human
Dignity, Moral Status, and Species Prejudice”,
Metaphilosophy
, 38(2–3): 309–329.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9973.2007.00476.x
Dillon, Robin S., 1992, “Respect And Care: Toward Moral
Integration 1”,
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
, 22(1):
105–131. doi:10.1080/00455091.1992.10717273
Dimock, Wai Chee, 2012, “High and Low”, in Waldron
2012: 119–128.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199915439.003.0006
Donnelly, Jack, 1982, “Human Rights and Human Dignity: An
Analytic Critique of Non-Western Conceptions of Human Rights”,
American Political Science Review
, 76(2): 303–316.
doi:10.2307/1961111
Douglas, Thomas, 2013, “Human Enhancement and Supra-Personal
Moral Status”,
Philosophical Studies
, 162(3):
473–497. doi:10.1007/s11098-011-9778-2
Douglass, Frederick, 1852,
Oration: Delivered in Corinthian
Hall, Rochester
, Rochester, NY: Lee, Mann, & Co.
Duncan, Craig, 2005, “Democratic Liberalism: The Politics of
Dignity”, in
Libertarianism: For and Against
, Craig
Duncan and Tibor Machan (eds), Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield,
79–126.
Dürig, Günter, 1952, “Die Menschenauffassung des
Grundgesetzes”,
Juristische Rundschau
, 1952(7):
259–263. doi:10.1515/juru.1952.1952.7.259
Dussel, Enrique, 2003, “Dignity: Its Denial and Recognition on a
Specific Context of Liberation”, in
The Discourse of Human
Dignity
, Regina Ammicht-Quinn, Maureeen Junker-Kenny and Elsa
Tamez (eds.), London: SCM Press, 93–104.
Düwell, Marcus, 2014, “Human Dignity: Concepts,
Discussions, Philosophical Perspectives”, in Düwell et al.
2014: 23–49. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.004
Düwell, Marcus, Jens Braarvig, Roger Brownsword, Dietmar
Mieth, Naomi van Steenbergen, and Dascha Düring (eds), 2014,
The Cambridge Handbook of Human Dignity: Interdisciplinary
Perspectives
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033
Dworkin, Ronald, 1977,
Taking Rights Seriously
,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Eberle, Edward J., 2002,
Dignity and Liberty: Constitutional
Visions in the Germany and the United States
, Westport, CT:
Praeger Publishers.
Edel, Abraham, 1969, “Humanist Ethics and the Meaning of
Human Dignity”, in
Moral Problems in Contemporary Society:
Essays in Humanistic Ethics
, Paul Kurtz (ed.), Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice-Hall, pp. 227–240.
Englard, Izhak, 2000, “Human Dignity: From Antiquity to Modern
Israel’s Constitutional Framework,”
Cardozo Law
Review
. 21: 1903–1927.
Egonsson, Dan, 1998,
Dimensions of Dignity: The Moral
Importance of Being Human
, Dordrecht: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-94-011-4974-7
Etinson, Adam, 2020, “What’s So Special About Human
Dignity?”,
Philosophy & Public Affairs
, 48(4):
353–381. doi:10.1111/papa.12175
Fanon, Frantz, 1967,
Black Skin: White Mask
, Charles
Markmann (trans.), New York, Grove Weidenfeld.
––– , 1963 [2004],
The Wretched of
the Earth
, Richard Philcox (trans.), New York: Grove Press.
Feinberg, Joel, 1970 [1980], “The Nature and Value of
Rights”,
The Journal of Value Inquiry
, 4(4):
243–260. Reprinted in his
Rights, Justice, and the Bounds of
Liberty
, Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press, 1980,
143–159. doi:10.1007/BF00137935
FitzPatrick, William J., 2013, “Worth/Dignity”, in
International Encyclopedia of Ethics
, Hugh LaFollette (ed.),
Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishing, 5546–5553.
doi:10.1002/9781444367072.wbiee205
Fleischacker, Samuel, 2019,
Being Me Being You: Adam Smith and
Empathy
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Forst, Rainer, 2011, “The Ground of Critique: On the Concept
of Human Dignity in Social Orders of Justification”,
Philosophy and Social Criticism
, 37(9): 965–976.
doi:10.1177/0191453711416082
Frick, Marie-Luisa, 2021, “Dehumanization and Human Rights”,
in
The Routledge Hadbook of Dehumanization
, Maria
Fronfeldner (ed.), London and New York: Routledge, 187–200.
Friedman, Marilyn, 2013, “Care Ethics”, in Hugh
LaFollette (ed.)
The International Encyclopedia of Ethics
,
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 705–713.
doi:10.1002/9781444367072.wbiee057
Gaylin, Willard, 1984, “In Defense of the Dignity of the Human
Being”,
The Hastings Center Report
, 14(4):
18–22. doi:10.2307/3561161
Gearty, Conor, 2014, “The State of Human Rights”,
Global
Policy
, 5(4): 391–400. doi:10.1111/1758-5899.12159
Gewirth, Alan, 1992, “Human Dignity as the Basis of
Rights”, in Meyer and Parent 1992: 10–28.
Gooding-Williams, Robert, 2018, “The Du
Bois–Washington Debate and the Idea of Dignity”, in
To
Shape a New World: Essays on the Political Philosophy of Martin Luther
King Jr.
, Tommie Shelby and Brandon M. Terry (eds), Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press, 19–34.
doi:10.4159/9780674919860-002
Goos, Christoph, “
Würde des Menschen
:
Restoring Human Dignity in Post-Nazi Germany”, in McCrudden
2013b: 79–94 (ch. 3).
Gotesky, Rubin, and Ervin Laszlo (eds), 1970,
Human Dignity:
This Century and the Next
, New York: Gordon and Breach.
Gross, Myra, 1993, “Dignity: The Keystone of
Alzheimer’s Care”,
Nursing Homes: Long Term Care
Management
, 42(7): 8.
Griffin, James, 2008,
On Human Rights
, Oxford/New York:
Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199238781.001.0001
Griffin, Miriam, 2017, “Dignity in Roman and Stoic
Thought”, in Debes 2017a: 47–65 (ch. 2).
Gruen, Lori, 2003 [2010], “The Moral Status of
Animals”,
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall
2010 edition), in Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2010/entries/moral-animal/
>.
Hanley, Ryan Patrick, 2017, “Rethinking Kant’s Debts
to Rousseau”,
Archiv für Geschichte der
Philosophie
, 99(4): 380–404.
doi:10.1515/agph-2017-0019
Hanvey, James, 2013, “Dignity, Person, and
Imago
Trinitatis
”, in McCrudden 2013b: 209–228 (ch.
11).
Harris, George W., 1997,
Dignity and Vulnerability: Strength
and Quality of Character
, Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
Haslam, Nick, 2014, “What Is Dehumanization?”, in
Humanness and Dehumanization
, Paul G. Bain, Jeroen Vaes, and
Jacques-Philippe Leyens (eds), New York and Hove: Psychology Press,
34–48 (ch. 3).
Healy, Mike and Wilkowska, Iwona, 2017, “Marx, Alientation and the
Denial of Dignity of Work”, in
Dignity and the
Organization
, Monika Kostera and Michael Pirson (eds.), London:
Palgrame MacMillan UK: 99–124.
Held, Virginia, 2006,
The Ethics of Care: Personal, Political,
and Global
, New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0195180992.001.0001
Henkin, Louis, 1992, “Human Dignity and Constitutional
Rights”, in Meyer and Parent 1992: 39–42.
Henderson, Christine Dunn, 2017, “On Bourgeois Dignity:
Making the Self-Made Man”, in Debes 2017a: 269–290 (ch.
9).
Herzog, Don, 2012, “Aristocratic Dignity?”, in Waldron
2012: 99–117. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199915439.003.0005
Hill, Thomas E., Jr, 1992,
Dignity and Practical Reason in
Kant’s Moral Theory
, Ithaca, NY: Cornell University
Press.
Hobbes, Thomas, 1651,
Leviathan
, London: Crooke.
Hollenbach, David, 2013, “Human Dignity: Experience and
History, Practical Reason and Faith”, in McCrudden 2013b:
123–139 (ch. 6).
–––, 2015, “Human Dignity in Catholic
Thought”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 250–259.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.031
Honneth, Axel, 2007,
Disrespect: The Normative Foundations of
Critical Theory
, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Howard, Rhoda E., 1992, “Dignity, Community, and Human
Rights”, in
Human Rights in Cross Cultural Perspective; A
Request for Consensus
, Abdullahi Ahmed An-Naʿim (ed.),
Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, pp.
81–104.
Howard, Rhoda E. and Jack Donnelly, 1986, “Human Dignity,
Human Rights, and Political Regimes”,
American Political
Science Review
, 80(3): 801–817. doi:10.2307/1960539
Iglesias, Teresa, 2001, “Bedrock Truth and the Dignity of the
Individual”,
Logos: A Journal of Catholic Thought and
Culture
, 4(1): 114–134. doi:10.1353/log.2001.0005
Ikeda, Takashi, 2014, “Commentary: On Crossing the Line
between Human and Nonhuman: Human Dignity Reconsidered”, in
The Future of Bioethics: International Dialogues
, Akira
Akabayashi (ed.), Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press,
371–376. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199682676.003.0047
Imbach, Ruedi, 2014, “Human Dignity in the Middle Ages
(Twelfth to Fourteenth Century)”, in Düwell et al. 2014:
64–73. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.007
Jaber, Dunja, 2000, “Human Dignity and the Dignity of
Creatures”,
Journal of Agricultural and Environmental
Ethics
, 13(1–2): 29–42. doi:10.1007/BF02694133
James, David, 2013,
Rousseau and German Idealism: Freedom,
Dependence and Necessity
, New York/Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139795388
Jenson, Robert W., 2006, “
Anima
Ecclesiastica
”, in Soulen and Woodhead 2006:
59–71.
Jha, Alok, 2008, “First British Human-animal Hybrid Embryos
Created by Scientists”,
The Guardian
, 2 April 2008.
 [
Jha 2008 available online
]
Johnson, Samuel, 1755, “Dignity”, in
A Dictionary
of the English Language
, London. Reprinted in
A Dictionary of
the English Language: A Digital Edition of the 1755 Classic by Samuel
Johnson
, Brandi Besalke (ed.), 2012.
 [
Johnson 1755 available online
]
Johnston, Josephine and Christopher Eliot, 2003, “Chimeras
and ‘Human Dignity’”,
The American Journal of
Bioethics
, 3(3): 6–8. doi:10.1162/15265160360706714
Jotterand, Fabrice, 2010, “Human Dignity and Transhumanism:
Do Anthro-Technological Devices Have Moral Status?”,
The
American Journal of Bioethics
, 10(7): 45–52.
doi:10.1080/15265161003728795
Kain, Patrick, 2009, “Kant’s Defense of Human Moral
Status”,
Journal of the History of Philosophy
, 47(1):
59–101. doi:10.1353/hph.0.0083
Kaplan, Marion A., 1999,
Between Dignity and Despair:
Jewish Life in Nazi Germany
. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Kant, Immanuel, 1785 [1996],
Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der
Sitten
, Riga: Johann Friedrich Hartknoch. Translated as
“Groundwork of The Metaphysics of Morals (1785)”, in
Practical Philosophy
, Mary J. Gregor (ed.), (The Cambridge
Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996, 37–108.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511813306.007
Kateb, George, 2011,
Human Dignity
, Cambridge, MA:
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.
Kaufmann, Paulus, Hannes Kuch, Christian Neuhäuser, and
Elaine Webster (eds), 2011,
Humiliation, Degradation,
Dehumanization: Human Dignity Violated
, (Library of Ethics and
Applied Philosophy 24), Dordrecht/New York: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-90-481-9661-6
Kemmerer, Alexandra, 2013, “Dignified Disciplinarity:
Towards a Transdisciplinary Understanding of Human Dignity”, in
McCrudden 2013b: 649–658 (ch. 39).
Kent, Bonnie, 2017, “In the Image of God: Human Dignity
after the Fall”, in Debes 2017a: 73–97 (ch. 3).
Killmister, Suzy, 2016, “Dignity, Torture, and Human
Rights”,
Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
, 19(5):
1087–1101. doi:10.1007/s10677-016-9725-6
–––, 2017, “Dignity: Personal, Social,
Human”,
Philosophical Studies
, 174(8): 2063–2082.
doi:10.1007/s11098-016-0788-y
–––, 2020,
Contours of Dignity
,
Oxford/New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780198844365.001.0001
Kilner, John F., 2004, “Human Dignity”, in
Encyclopedia of Bioethics
, Stephen G. Post (ed.), third
edition, New York: Macmillan Reference USA, volume 2,
1193–1200.
King, Martin Luther, 1963 [2011], “The Unresolved Race
Question”, Speech, District 65 Thirtieth-Anniversary Convention,
Madison Square Garden, New York City, 23 October 1963. Reprinted in
“All Labor Has Dignity”
, Michael K. Honey (ed.),
Boston: Beacon Press, 87–98.
–––, 1963 [1986], “Letter from Birmingham
City Jail”, in
A Testamnet of Hope: The Essential Writing and
Speechs of Martin Luther King
, James Melvin Washington (ed.), New
York: Harper One, 289–302.
Kittay, Eva Feder, 2003, “Disability, Equal Dignity and
Care”, in Ammicht-Quinn, Junker-Kenny, and Tamez 2003:
105–115.
–––, 2005, “At the Margins of Moral
Personhood”,
Ethics
(Symposium on Disability), 116(1):
100–131. doi:10.1086/454366
–––, 2011, “The Ethics of Care,
Dependence, and Disability”,
Ratio Juris
, 24(1):
49–58. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9337.2010.00473.x
Kofman, Sarah, 1982 [1997], “The Economy of Respect: Kant
and Respect for Women”, Nicola Fisher (trans.),
Social
Research
, 49(2): 383–404 (an extract from her
Le
Respect des femmes (Kant et Rousseau)
, Paris: Galilée,
1982). Reprinted in
Feminist Interpretations of Immanuel
Kant
, Robin May Schott (ed.), University Park, PA: Penn State
Press, 1997, pp. 355–372.
Kolnai, Aurel, 1976, “Dignity”,
Philosophy
,
51(197): 251–271. doi:10.1017/S003181910001932X
Korsgaard, Christine M., 1986, “Kant’s Formula of
Humanity”,
Kant-Studien
, 77(1–4): 183–202.
doi:10.1515/kant.1986.77.1-4.183
Kraynak, Robert P. and Glenn E. Tinder (eds), 2003,
In Defense
of Human Dignity: Essays for Our Times
, (Loyola Topics in
Political Philosophy), Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame
Press.
Krishnamurthy, Meena, 2022, “Martin Luther King Jr. on
Democratic Propaganda, Shame, and Moral Transformation”,
Political Theory
, 50(2): 305–336.
doi:10.1177/00905917211021796
Kuhse, Helga, 2000, “Is There a Tension between Autonomy and
Dignity?”, in
Bioethics and Biolaw, Volume II: Four Ethical
Principles
, Peter Kemp, Jacob Dahl Rendtorff, and Niels Mattson
Johansen (eds), Copenhagen: Rhodos International Science and Art
Publishers, 61–74.
LaFollette, Hugh and Niall Shanks, 1996, “The Origin of
Speciesism”,
Philosophy
, 71(275): 41–61.
doi:10.1017/S0031819100053250
LaVaque-Manty, Mika, 2017, “Universalizing Dignity in the
Nineteenth Century”, in Debes 2017a: 301–322 (ch.
10).
Lebech, Mette, 2009,
On the Problem of Human Dignity: A
Hermeneutical and Phenomenological Investigation
, Würzburg:
Königshausen & Neumann.
Lee, Patrick and Robert P. George, 2008, “The Nature and
Basis of Human Dignity”,
Ratio Juris
, 21(2):
173–193. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9337.2008.00386.x
Lewis, Milton, 2007, “A Brief History of Human Dignity: Idea
and Application”, in Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 93–105.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_8
Loewy, Erich H., 1999, “Physician Assisted Dying and Death
with Dignity: Missed Opportunities and Prior Neglected
Conditions”,
Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy
,
2(2): 189–194. doi:10.1023/A:1009997829750
Loike, John, 2013, “The Evolving Bioethical Landscape of
Human-Animal Chimeras”, in
Human Dignity in Bioethics: From
Worldviews to the Public Square
, Stephen Dilley and Nathan J.
Palpant (eds), New York/Abingdon: Routledge, 282–299.
Lorberbaum, Yair, 2014, “Human Dignity in the Jewish
Tradition”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 135–144.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.015
Malpas, Jeff, 2007, “Human Dignity and Human Being,” in Malpas and
Lickiss 2007b: 27–42.
Malpas, Jeff, and Norelle Lickiss, 2007a, “Introduction to a
Conversation”, in Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 1–5.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_1
––– (eds), 2007b,
Perspectives on Human
Dignity: A Conversation
, Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0
Luban, David, 2009, “Human Dignity, Humiliation, and
Torture”,
Kennedy Institute of Ethics Journal
, 19(3):
211–230. doi:10.1353/ken.0.0292
Luo, An’xian, 2014, “Human Dignity in Traditional
Chinese Confucianism”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 177–181
(ch. 17). doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.021
Macklin, Ruth, 2003, “Dignity Is a Useless Concept”,
BMJ
, 327(20–27): 1419–1420.
doi:10.1136/bmj.327.7429.1419
Mandeville, Bernard, 1714 [1988],
The Fable of the Bees
,
2 vols., London. Reference is to the reprint with introduction by F.
B. Kaye, Indianapolis, IN: Liberty Fund Press, 1988.
Manning, Rita C., 2009, “A Care Approach”, in
A
Companion to Bioethics
, Helga Kuhse and Peter Singer (eds),
Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 105–116.
doi:10.1002/9781444307818.ch11
McCrudden, Christopher, 2008, “Human Dignity and Judicial
Interpretation of Human Rights”,
European Journal of
International Law
, 19(4): 655–724.
doi:10.1093/ejil/chn043
–––, 2013a, “In Pursuit of Human Dignity:
An Introduction to Current Debates”, in McCrudden 2013b:
1–58 (ch. 1).
––– (ed.), 2013b,
Understanding Human
Dignity
(Proceedings of the British Academy 192), Oxford: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.5871/bacad/9780197265642.001.0001
McMahan, Jeff, 2002,
The Ethics of Killing: Problems at the
Margins of Life
, (Oxford Ethics Series), Oxford/New York: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/0195079981.001.0001
McNamee, M. J. and S. D. Edwards, 2006, “Transhumanism,
Medical Technology and Slippery Slopes”,
Journal of Medical
Ethics
, 32(9): 513–518. doi:10.1136/jme.2005.013789
Metz, Thaddeus, 2010, “Human Dignity, Capital Punishment, and an
African Moral Theory: Toward a New Philosophy of Human
Rights”,
Journal of Human Rights
, 9(1): 81–99.
Meulen, Ruud ter, 2010, “Dignity, Posthumanism, and the
Community of Values”,
The American Journal of
Bioethics
, 10(7): 69–70. doi:10.1080/15265161003728852
Meyer, Michael J., 1987, “Kant’s Concept of Dignity
and Modern Political Thought”,
History of European
Ideas
, 8(3): 319–332. doi:10.1016/0191-6599(87)90005-2
–––, 1989, “Dignity, Rights, and
Self-Control”,
Ethics
, 99(3): 520–534.
doi:10.1086/293095
–––, 2001, “The Simple Dignity of Sentient
Life: Speciesism and Human Dignity”,
Journal of Social
Philosophy
, 32(2): 115–126.
doi:10.1111/0047-2786.00083
Meyer, Michael J. and William A. Parent (eds), 1992,
The
Constitution of Rights: Human Dignity and American Values
,
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Midgley, Mary, 1984,
Animals and Why They Matter
, Athens,
GA: University of Georgia Press.
Mieth, Dietmar, 2014, “Human Dignity in Late-Medieval
Spiritual and Political Conflicts”, in Düwell et al. 2014:
74–84. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.008
Migiel, Marilyn, 1991, “The Dignity of Man: A Feminist
Perspective”, in
Refiguring Woman: Perspectives on Gender
and the Italian Renaissance
, Marilyn Migiel and Juliana Schiesari
(eds), Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 211–232.
Mikkola, Mari, 2021, “Why Dehumanization is Distinct from
Objectification”, in
The Routledge Handbook of
Dehumanization
, Maria Kronfeldner (ed.), London and New York:
Routledge, 326–340.
Miller, Sarah Clark, 2012,
The Ethics of Need: Agency,
Dignity, and Obligation
, (Routledge Studies in Philosophy), New
York: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203334393
Morawa, Alexander H. E., 2003, “Vulnerability as a Concept
of International Human Rights Law”,
Journal of International
Relations and Development
, 6(2): 139–155.
Morris, Bertram, 1946, “The Dignity of Man”,
Ethics
, 57(1): 57–64. doi:10.1086/290530
Moyn, Samuel, 2013, “The Secret History of Constitutional
Dignity”, in McCrudden 2013b: 95–112 (ch. 4).
Muray, Leslie A., 2007, “Human Uniqueness vs. Human
Distinctiveness: The ‘Imago Dei’ in the Kinship of all
Creatures”,
American Journal of Theology &
Philosophy
, 28(3): 299–310.
Murdoch, Iris, 1970,
The Sovereignty of the Good
, London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Neal, Mary, 2012, “‘Not Gods But Animals’: Human
Dignity and Vulnerable Subjecthood”,
Liverpool Law
Review
, 33(3): 177–200. doi:10.1007/s10991-012-9124-6
Neuhäuser, Christian, 2011, “Humiliation: The
Collective Dimension”, in Kaufmann et al. 2011: 21–36.
doi:10.1007/978-90-481-9661-6_3
Noddings, Nel, 1984,
Caring: A Feminine Approach to Ethics
& Moral Education
, Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
Norcross, Alastair, 2004, “Puppies, Pigs, and People: Eating
Meat and Marginal Cases”,
Philosophical Perspectives
,
18: 229–245. doi:10.1111/j.1520-8583.2004.00027.x
Nordenfelt, Lennart, 2003, “Dignity of the Elderly: An
Introduction”,
Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy
,
6(2): 99–101. doi:10.1023/A:1024150526303
–––, 2009, “The Concept of Dignity”,
in
Dignity in Care for Older People
, Lennart Nordenfelt
(ed.), Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 26–53.
doi:10.1002/9781444316414.ch2
Novak, Michael, 1998, “The Judeo-Christian Foundation of
Human Dignity, Personal Liberty, and the Concept of the Person”,
Journal of Markets and Morality
1(2): 107–121.
–––, 1999, “Human Dignity, Human
Rights”,
First Things
, 97: 39–42.
Nussbaum, Martha C., 1995, “Human Capabilities, Female Human
Beings”, in Nussbaum and Glover 1995: 61–104.
doi:10.1093/0198289642.003.0003
–––, 2000a, “The Future of Feminist
Liberalism”,
Proceedings and Addresses of the American
Philosophical Association
, 74(2): 47–79.
doi:10.2307/3219683
–––, 2002b, “The Worth of Human Dignity:
Two Tensions in Stoic Cosmopolitanism”, in Clark and Rajak 2002:
31–49.
–––, 2004, “Beyond ‘Compassion and
Humanity’: Justice for Nonhuman Animals”, in
Animal
Rights: Current Debates and New Directions
, Cass R. Sunstein and
Martha Nussbaum (eds), New York: Oxford University Press,
299–320.
–––, 2006a,
Frontiers of Justice:
Disability, Nationality, Species Membership
, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press
–––, 2006b, “The Moral Status of
Animals”,
Chronicle of Higher Education
, 3 February
2006.
 [
Nussbaum 2006b available online
]
Nussbaum, Martha C. and Jonathan Glover (eds), 1995,
Women,
Culture, and Development: A Study of Human Capabilities
, (Wider
Studies in Development Economics), Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0198289642.001.0001
Ober, Josiah, 2014, “Meritocratic and Civic Dignity in
Greco-Roman Antiquity”, in Düwell et al. 2014: 53–63.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.006
O’Mathúna, Dónal P, 2006, “Human Dignity
in the Nazi Era: Implications for Contemporary Bioethics”,
BMC Medical Ethics
, 7(December): article 2.
doi:10.1186/1472-6939-7-2
–––, 2013, “Human Dignity and the Ethics
of Human Enhancement”,
Trans-Humanities Journal
, 6(1):
99–120. doi:10.1353/trh.2013.0012
O’Neill, Onora, 1998, “Kant on Duties Regarding
Nonrational Nature II”,
Aristotelian Society, Supplementary
Volume
, 72: 211–228.
Parekh, Serena, 2008,
Hannah Arendt and the Challenge of
Modernity: A Phenomenology of Human Rights
, New York:
Routledge.
Pharo, Lars Kirkhusmo, 2014, “The Concepts of Human Dignity
in Moral Philosophies of Indigenous Peoples of the Americas”, in
Düwell et al. 2014: 147–154 (ch. 13).
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.017
Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni, 1486,
Oratio de hominis
dignitate
(Oration on the dignity of man), C. Glenn Wallis, Paul
J. W. Miller, and Douglas Carmichael (trans.), Indianapolis: Hackett,
1965.
Pinker, Steven, 2008, “The Stupidity of Dignity”,
The New Republic
, 27 May 2008.
 [
Pinker 2008 available online
]
Pluhar, Evelyn B., 1995,
Beyond Prejudice: The Moral
Significance of Human and Nonhuman Animals
, Durham, NC: Duke
University Press. doi:10.1215/9780822396048
President’s Council on Bioethics, 2008,
Human Dignity
and Bioethics: Essays Commissioned by the President’s Council on
Bioethics
, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
 [
President’s Council on Bioethics 2008 available online
]
Pritchard, Michael S., 1972, “Human Dignity and
Justice”,
Ethics
, 82(4): 299–313.
doi:10.1086/291853
Pufendorf, Samuel, 1672/1691 [2003],
De officio hominis
et civis
(
The Whole Duty of Man, According to the Law of
Nature)
, Andrew Tooke (trans.), 1735, Ian Hunter and David
Saunders (eds), Indianapolis: Liberty Fund Press, 2003.
Quinn, Philip, 2007, “On the Intrinsic Value of Human
Persons”, in
Persons: Human and Divine
, Peter van
Inwagen and Dean Zimmerman (eds), New York: Oxford University Press,
237–260.
Rachels, James, 1990,
Created From Animals: The Moral
Implications of Darwinism
, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Rolston, Holmes, 2008, “Human Uniqueness and Human Dignity:
Persons in Nature and the Nature of Persons”, in
Human Dignity and
Bioethics: Essays Commissioned by the President’s Council on
Bioethics
, Adam Schulman (ed.), President’s Council on
Bioethics.
Rosen, Michael, 2012a,
Dignity: Its History and Meaning
,
Cambridge, MA/London: Harvard University Press.
–––, 2012b, “Dignity Past and
Present”, in Waldron 2012: 79–97.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199915439.003.0004
–––, 2013, “Dignity: The Case
Against”, in McCrudden 2013b: 143–154 (ch. 7).
Rotenstreich, Nathan, 1983,
Man and His Dignity
.
Magnes Press, Hebrew University.
Saastamoinen, Kari, 2010, “Pufendorf on Natural Equality,
Human Dignity, and Self-Esteem”,
Journal of the History of
Ideas
, 71(1): 39–62. doi:10.1353/jhi.0.0065
Sandler, Ronald and John Basl, 2010, “Transhumanism, Human
Dignity, and Moral Status”,
The American Journal of
Bioethics
, 10(7): 63–66. doi:10.1080/15265161003714019
Sangiovanni, Andrea, 2017,
Humanity Without Dignity: Moral
Equality, Respect, and Human Rights
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Schachter, Oscar, 1983, “Human Dignity as a Normative
Concept”,
American Journal of International Law
, 77(4):
848–854. doi:10.2307/2202536
Schopenhauer, Arthur, 1840 [1965],
Über das Fundament der
Moral
, Copenhagen. Translated as
On the Basis of
Morality
, E. F. J. Payne (trans.), Indianapolis, IN:
Bobbs-Merrrill, 1965.
Schroeder, Doris, 2012, “Human Rights and Human Dignity: An
Appeal to Separate the Conjoined Twins”,
Ethical Theory and
Moral Practice
, 15(3): 323–335.
doi:10.1007/s10677-011-9326-3
Schwöbel, Christopher, 2006, “Recovering Human
Dignity”, in Soulen and Woodhead 2006: 44–58.
Scott, Rebecca J., 2013, “Dignité/Dignidade:
Organizing against Threats to Dignity in Societies after
Slavery”, in McCrudden 2013b: 61–78 (ch. 2).
Sensen, Oliver, 2011, “Human Dignity in Historical
Perspective: The Contemporary and Traditional Paradigms”,
European Journal of Political Theory
, 10(1): 71–91.
doi:10.1177/1474885110386006
–––, 2017, “Dignity: Kant’s Revolutionary
Conception,” in Debes 2017a: 237–262 (ch. 8).
Shah, Mustafa, 2017, “Islamic Conceptions of Dignity:
Historical Trajectories and Paradigms”, in Debes 2017a:
99–126 (ch. 4).
Singer, Peter, 2009 “Speciesism and Moral
Status”,
Metaphilosophy
, 40(3-4): 567–581. 
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9973.2009.01608.x
Shultziner, Doron, 2007, “Human Dignity: Functions and
Meanings”, in Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 73–92.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_7
Sophocles, c. 441 BCE [1951],
Antigone
, in
The Loeb
Classical Library: Sophocles Vol. 1
(LCL 21), F. Storr (trans.),
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Soskice, Janet, 2013, “Human Dignity and the Image of
God”, in McCrudden 2013b: 229–244 (ch. 12).
Soulen, R. Kendall and Linda Woodhead (eds), 2006,
God and
Human Dignity
, Grand Rapids, MI/Cambridge, UK: William B.
Eerdmans Publishing.
Spelman, Elizabeth V., 1978, “On Treating Persons as
Persons”,
Ethics
, 88(2): 150–161.
doi:10.1086/292066
Spiegelberg, Herbert, 1971, “Human Dignity: A Challenge to
Contemporary Philosophy”,
The Philosophy Forum
,
9(1–2): 39–64. doi:10.1080/02604027.1971.9971711
Statman, Daniel, 2000, “Humiliation, Dignity and
Self-Respect”,
Philosophical Psychology
, 13(4):
523–540. doi:10.1080/09515080020007643
Stern, A., 1975, “On Value and Human Dignity”,
Listening: Journal of Religion and Culture
, 1975(Spring):
74–90.
Sulmasy, Daniel P., 2007, “Human Dignity and Human
Worth”, in Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 27–42.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_2
Tadd, Win, Linus Vanlaere, and Chris Gastmans, 2010,
“Clarifying the Concept of Human Dignity in the Care of the
Elderly: A Dialogue between Empirical and Philosophical
Approaches”,
Ethical Perspectives
, 17(2):
253–281. doi:10.2143/EP.17.2.2049266
Tarling, Nicholas, 2007, “Dignity and Indignity”, in
Malpas and Lickiss 2007b: 141–150.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6281-0_13
Tasioulas, John, 2013, “Human Dignity and the Foundations of Human
Rights”, in McCrudden 2013: 191–312 (ch. 17).
Toscano, Manuel, 2011, “Human Dignity as High Moral
Status”,
Les ateliers de l’éthique/The Ethics
Forum
, 6(2): 4–25. doi:10.7202/1008029ar
Trinkaus, Charles Edward, 1970,
In Our Image and Likeness:
Humanity and Divinity in Italian Humanist Thought
, 2 vols.,
London: Constable.
[UN] United Nations, 1945,
United Nations Charter
.
 [
UN 1945 available online
]
–––, 1948,
Universal Declaration of Human
Rights
.
 [
UN 1948 available online
]
Valadier, Paul, 2003, “The Person who Lacks Dignity”,
in Ammicht-Quinn, Junker-Kerry, and Tamez, 2003: 49–56.
Valentini, Laura, 2017, “Dignity and Human Rights: A
Reconceptualisation”,
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
,
37(4): 862–885. doi:10.1093/ojls/gqx011
Van Assche, Kristof and Sigrid Sterckx, 2014, “The
Protection of Human Dignity in Research Involving Human Body
Material”, in
Humanity across International Law and
Biolaw
, Britta van Beers, Luigi Corrias, and Wouter G. Werner
(eds), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 265–287.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781107257139.016
Varga, Somogy, 2017, “Reflection taking refuge from history in
morality: Marx, morality, and dignity”, in Debes 2017a: 291–300.
Verbeek, Theo, 2014, “Rousseau and Human Dignity”, in Düwell
et. al. 2014: 117–125. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511979033.013
Waldron, Jeremy, 2012,
Dignity, Rank, and Rights
, Meir
Dan-Cohen (ed.), (Berkeley Tanner Lectures), New York: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199915439.001.0001
Walzer, Michael, 1994,
Thick and Thin: Moral Argument at Home
and Abroad
, Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Webster, Noah, 1806, A Compendious Dictionary of the English
Language, New Haven, CT: Sidney’s
 Press,[
Webster 1806 available online
].
Weil, Simone, 1957 [1986], “La personne et le
sacré”, written 1942/43, first published in
Écrits de Londres et dernières lettres
, Paris:
Gallimard, 1957. Translated as “Human Personality”, in
Simone Weil: An Anthology
, Siân Miles (ed.), New York:
Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1986.
Weithman, Paul, 2008, “Two Arguments from Human
Dignity”, in President’s Council on Bioethics 2008:
435–467 (ch. 17).
 [
Weithman 2008 available online
]
Wolf, Susan, 1995, “Commentary on: Martha Nussbaum’s
‘Human Capabilities, Female Human Beings’”, in
Nussbaum and Glover 1995: 105–115.
doi:10.1093/0198289642.003.0004
Wood, Allen W., 1999,
Kant’s Ethical Thought
,
(Modern European Philosophy), Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139173254
World Medical Association [WMA], 2013, “World Medical
Association Declaration of Helsinki: Ethical Principles for Medical
Research Involving Human Subjects”, 64th WMA General Assembly,
Fortaleza, Brazil, October.
 [
WMA 2013 (Declaration of Helsinki) available online
]
Zhuangzi [Chuang Tzu, late 4th century BCE], 1968,
The
Complete Works of Chuang Tzu
, Burton Watson (trans.), New York:
Columbia University Press.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Council of Europe, 1997,
 “
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Dignity of the Human Being with Regard to the Application of Biology and Medicine: Convention on Human Rights and Biomedicine
”
 (ETS No. 164), Oviedo.
1689,
 “
English Bill of Rights
”
1789,
Déclaration des Droits de l’Homme et du Citoyen
.
NHS Confederation, Local Government Association, Age UK, 2012,
 “
Delivering Dignity: Securing Dignity in Care for Older People in Hospitals and Care
”.
The Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949
UNESCO, 2005,
Universal Declaration on Bioethics and Human Rights
,
 19 October 2005, Paris.
Related Entries
animals, moral status of
|
cognitive disability and moral status
|
ethics, biomedical: chimeras, human/non-human
|
Kant, Immanuel: moral philosophy
|
moral status, grounds of
|
recognition
|
respect
|
rights: human
Acknowledgments
I am deeply grateful to my anonymous referees, who provided careful,
generous, and thorough feedback on initial drafts of this entry. For
research assistance on various elements of this article I am grateful
to Zachary Neemah, Samuel Munroe, Reese Faust, and Alejandro Toledo.
The history section draws on my own introduction to
Dignity: A
History
(2017a), by permission of Oxford University Press.