Feminist Philosophy
First published Thu Jun 28, 2018; substantive revision Fri Jul 14, 2023
This entry provides an introduction to the feminist philosophy section
of the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (SEP). Overseen by a board
of feminist philosophers, this section primarily takes up feminist
philosophy of the twentieth and tweny-first century. It has three
subsections of entries (as can be seen in Table of Contents under
“feminist philosophy”): (1) approaches to feminist
philosophy, (2) feminist interventions in philosophy, and (3) feminist
philosophical topics. By “approaches to feminist
philosophy” we mean the main philosophical approaches such as
analytic, continental, psychoanalytic, pragmatist, and various
intersections. We see these as
methodologies
that can be
fruitfully employed to engage philosophically isssues of feminist
concern. The second group of entries, feminist interventions in
philosophy, includes entries on how feminist philosophers have
intervened in and begun to transform traditional philosopical areas
such as aesthetics, ethics, the history of philosophy, metaphysics,
and political philosophy. Entries in the third group, feminist
philosophical topics, take up concepts and matters that traditional
philosophy has either overlooked or undertheorized, including
autonomy, the body, objectification, sex and gender, and reproduction.
In short, this third group of entries shows how feminist philosophers
have rendered philosophical previously un-problematized topics, such
as the body, class and work, disability, the family, human
trafficking, reproduction, the self, sex work, and sexuality. Entries
in this third group also show how a particularly feminist lens
refashions issues of globalization, human rights, popular culture,
race and racism, and science. Following a brief overview of feminism
as a political and intellectual movement, we provide an overview of
these three parts of the feminist section of the SEP.
In addition to the feminist philosophy section of the SEP, there are
also a number of entries on women in the history of philosophy, for
example, on
Mary Wollstonecraft
,
Mary Astell
,
Jane Addams
,
Rosa Luxemburg
,
Simone de Beauvoir
,
Iris Murdoch
, and others. Additionally, dozens of other entries
throughout the SEP discuss facets of feminist philosophy, including,
to name just a handful, the entries on
global justice
,
respect
,
contemporary Africana philosophy
,
multiculturalism
,
privacy
,
 and
Latinx philosophy
.
1. Introduction
2. What is Feminism?
3. Approaches to Feminism
4. Interventions in Philosophy
5. Topics in Feminism
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. What is Feminism?
Broadly understood, feminism is both an intellectual commitment and a
political movement that seeks an end to gender-based oppression.
Motivated by the quest for social justice, feminist inquiry provides a
wide range of perspectives on cultural, economic, social, and
political phenomena. It identifies and evaluates the many ways that
some norms have been used to exclude, marginalize, and oppress people
on the basis of gender, as well as how gendered dentities have been
shaped to conform and uphold the norms of a patriarchal society. In so
doing, it tries to understand the roots of a system that has been
prevalent in nearly all known places and times. It also explores what
a just society would look like.
While less frequently than one would think, throughout history women
have rebelled against repressive structures. It was not until the late
19th century that feminism coalesced into a movement. In the mid-1800s
the term
feminism
was still used to refer to “the
qualities of females.” After the First International
Women’s Conference in Paris in 1892, the term
feminism
,
following the French term
féministe
, was used
regularly in English for a belief in and advocacy of equal rights for
women based on the idea of the equality of the sexes. Hence the term
feminism
in English is rooted in the mobilization for
women’s suffrage in Europe and the United States during the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century.
As a term,
feminism
has many different uses and its meanings
are often contested. For example, some writers use the term to refer
to a historically specific political movement in the United States and
Europe; other writers use it to refer to the belief that there are
injustices against women, though there is no consensus on the exact
list of these injustices. Some have found it useful, if controversial,
to think of the women’s movement in the United States as
occurring in “waves.” The wave model has some virtues, but
it also tends to overlook a great deal of heterogeneity of thought in
any given moment. It works well enough for what is thought of as the
first wave, identified as the period from the mid-nineteenth century
until the passage of the Nineteenth Amendment in 1920. This first wave
focused on the struggle to achieve basic political rights. According
to the wave model, feminism in the United States waned after women
achieved voting rights, to be revived in the late 1960s and early
1970s as “second wave” feminism. In this second wave, the
model holds, feminists pushed beyond the early quest for political
rights to fight for greater equality across the board, e.g., in
education, the workplace, and at home. But in actuality, many
feminists during this time were focusing on more than equality. Like
the first wave, many of the leaders of the second wave of feminism
were white women seeking equal rights. But also, as in the first wave,
other voices emerged, broadening the movement. The second wave came to
include women of different identities, ethnicities, and orientations.
In addition to calling for equal political rights, they called for
greater equality across the board, e.g., in education, the workplace,
and at home. Transformations of feminism beginning in the 1990s have
resulted in a “third wave.” Third Wave feminists often
critique earlier feminists for their lack of attention to the
differences among women due to class, ethnicity, nationality,
religion, and race (see Breines 2002; Springer 2002), and emphasize
“identity” as a site of gender struggle. (For more
information on the “wave” model and each of the
“waves,” see the subsection on
Waves of Feminism
in the Other Internet
Resources section.)
Some feminist scholars object to identifying feminism in terms of
waves on the grounds that doing so eclipses differences within each
wave as well as continuity of feminist resistance to male domination
throughout history and across cultures. In other words, feminism is
not confined to a few (white) women in the West over the past century
or so. Moreover, even considering only relatively recent efforts to
resist male domination in Europe and the United States, the emphasis
on “First” and “Second” Wave feminism ignores
the ongoing resistance to male domination between the 1920s and 1960s
and the resistance outside mainstream politics, particularly by women
of color and working class women (Cott 1987). The wave model also
cannot account for theoretical work taking place between waves, for
example, of the tremendous work done by Simone de Beauvoir in her
groundbreaking book of 1949,
The Second Sex
. Because of these
many limitiations of the wave model, the feminist section of the SEP
makes little use of it.
Although the term
feminism
has a history in English linked
with women’s activism from the late nineteenth century to the
present, it is useful to distinguish feminist ideas or beliefs from
feminist political movements, for even in periods where there has been
no significant political activism around women’s subordination,
individuals have been concerned with and theorized about justice for
women. So, for example, it makes sense to ask whether Plato was a
feminist, given his view that some women should be trained to rule
(
Republic
, Book V), even though he was an exception in his
historical context (see, e.g., Tuana 1994). Overall, feminism can be
understood as not only a social movement but also a set of beliefs,
concepts, and theories that seek to analyze, diagnose, and identify
solutions to the manifold injustices that people suffer on account of
gendered noirms Broadly understood, this is feminism as a intellectual
movement. The SEP feminist section aims to chronicle and explain the
various theories, concepts, and philosophical tools that feminist
philosophers have developed.
Much has been made of the methodological differences or
“divides” between various philosophical traditions, namely
analytic and continental, but also pragmatist and psychoanalytic. But
throughout these entries the reader will find a continuity of
descriptions on the meaning of feminism, even with the heterogeneity
of the philosophical methodologies these entries’ authors
employ. The entry on feminist ethics, written by the analytic feminist
philosopher Kathryn Norlock, describes that field in a way that is
agreeable to almost any feminist philosopher:
Feminist Ethics
aims “to understand, criticize, and
correct” how gender operates within our moral beliefs and
practices (Lindemann 2005, 11) and our methodological approaches to
ethical theory. More specifically, feminist ethicists aim to
understand, criticize, and correct: (1) the binary view of gender, (2)
the privilege historically available to men, and/or (3) the ways that
views about gender maintain oppressive social orders or practices that
harm others, especially girls and women who historically have been
subordinated along gendered dimensions including sexuality and
gender-identity. (entry on
feminist ethics
,
 introduction)
Likewise, the entry on feminist perspectives on power, written by the
critical theorist Amy Allen, proposes the idea that “although
any general definition of feminism would no doubt be controversial, it
seems undeniable that much work in feminist theory is devoted to the
tasks of critiquing gender subordination, analyzing its intersections
with other forms of subordination such as racism, heterosexism, and
class oppression, and envisioning prospects for individual and
collective resistance and emancipation.” (entry on
feminist perspectives on power
,
 introduction)
Even with general overall shared commitments about the meaning of
feminism, numerous differences among feminist philosophers do show up
in the array of arenas outlined in this section of the SEP. Some of
these may be due to different methodological approaches (whether, for
example, continental or analytic), but others show up because of
different ontological commitments (such as the category of woman) and
beliefs about what kind of political and moral remedies should be
sought.
Nonetheless, over the decades there has been a lot of frustration,
perhaps because as philosophers these feminist theorists often want to
get to the (one) truth of the matter, for example, what is “a
woman”? What is freedom? What is autonomy? Yet so far any search
for a unified or unifying theory of feminism has yet to bear fruit.
Consider the seemingly unproblematic claim that feminism is a
commitment to women’s equal rights. Perhaps it is, but framing
it this way comes with its own presuppositions. The first is that
feminism is committed to a liberal model of politics. Although most
feminists would probably agree that there is some sense of rights on
which achieving equal rights for women is a necessary condition for
feminism to succeed, most would also argue that this would not be
sufficient. This is because women’s oppression under male
domination rarely if ever consists solely in depriving women of
political and legal rights, but also extends into the structure of our
society and the content of our culture, and the workings of languages
and how they shape perceptions and permeate our consciousness (e.g.,
Bartky 1988, Postl 2017). A second presupposition is that there is
some clear and universal definition of what it is to be a woman. The
SEP entry, Feminist Perspectives on Sex and Gender, gives a rich
overview of what is problematic about this supposition. Any attempt to
define “woman,” according to Judith Butler, is also an
attempt to exclude some from that category. More recently this debate
shows up in discussions about nonbinary and trans people. Previously,
it showed up in suppositions that the typical subject of feminism was
white and middle class. While feminism would be easier to theorize if
it were clear who its subject is, any attempt to define it runs into
trouble. (see the entry on
feminist perspectives on trans issues
)
Is there any point, then, in asking what feminism is? Rather than
looking for a unified field theory of feminism, perhaps feminism can
be identified as an engagement precisely where there are
contradictions over questions of freedom, identity, and agency. These
contradictions are not just logical ones but also historical ones. For
example, the question of women’s political equality to men arose
precisely at those historical moments when “all men” came
to be deemed as equal (McAfee 2021). During the French Revolution, the
French settled the matter by saying that “men” meant men
and not women. In the American Revolution, “men” was not
so clearly gendered but it was certainly raced as white. Equality
becomes an issue precisely where there is a disjunct between what
seems to be the case normatively and what is happening empirically.
Questions about the category of women arise in the context of
political diversity and biological malleability, where peoples of many
cultures mingle and sexual or gender identity can be altered. Feminist
debates over pornography and sex work become heated in the context,
respectively, of a free press and economic precarity. In short,
feminist inquiry arises in the context of disagreement and
contradiction and it produces new ways of approaching issues and
asking questions. Thus, that it lacks a cohesive set of answers may be
beside the point.
In sum, “feminism” is an umbrella term for a range of
views about injustices against women. There are disagreements among
feminists about the nature of justice in general and the nature of
sexism, in particular, the specific kinds of injustice or wrong women
suffer; and the group who should be the primary focus of feminist
efforts. Nonetheless, feminists are committed to bringing about social
change to end injustice against women, in particular, injustice
against women as women.
2. Feminist Scholarship
Contemporary feminist philosophical scholarship emerged in the 1970s
as more women began careers in higher education, including philosophy.
As they did so, they also began taking up matters from their own
experience for philosophical scrutiny. These scholars were influenced
both by feminist movements in their midst as well as by their
philosophical training, which generally was anything but feminist.
Until about the 1990s, one could not go to graduate school to study
“feminist philosophy.” While students and scholars could
turn to the writings of Simone de Beauvoir or look back historically
to the writings of “first wave” feminists like Mary
Wollstonecraft, most of the philosophers writing in the first decades
of the emergence of feminist philosophy brought their particular
training and expertise to bear on analyzing issues raised by the
women’s liberation movement of the 1960s and 1970s, such as
abortion, affirmative action, equal opportunity, the institutions of
marriage, sexuality, and love. Additionally, feminist philosophical
scholarship increasingly focused on the very same types of issues
taken up by mainstream philosophers.
Feminist philosophical scholarship begins with attention to women, and
to limitations on their roles and locations and the ways they were
valued or devalued. It developed further by considering gender in less
binary terms as well as recognizing that gender is only one fact of
the complex interactions among class, race, ability, and sexuality.
Feminist scholarship asks how attention to these might transform
feminist philosophy itself. From here we move to the realm of the
symbolic and how it constructs “the feminine.” How is the
feminine instantiated and constructed within the texts of philosophy?
What role does it play in forming, either through its absence or its
presence, the central concepts of philosophy?
Feminist philosophers brought their philosophical tools to bear on
these questions. Since these feminist philosophers employed the
philosophical tools they knew best and found most promising, feminist
philosophy began to emerge from all the traditions of Western
philosophy prevalent at the end of the twentieth century, including
analytic, continental, and classical American philosophy. While the
thematic focus of their work was often influenced by the topics and
questions highlighted by these traditions, the larger shared feminist
concerns often create as much commonality as difference. Hence, a
given question could be taken up and addressed from an array of views
in ways that are sometimes divergent and at other times
complementary.
As an historically male discipline, many of the leading philosophical
journals and societies did not recognize much feminist scholarship as
properly philosophical. In response, feminist scholars began founding
their own journals and organizations. The first leading feminist
journal,
Hypatia: A Journal of Feminist Philosophy
, was
founded in 1982 as a venue for feminist philosophical scholarship. It
embraced a diversity of methodological approaches in feminist
philosophy, publishing work from a variety of traditions. Feminist
scholarship in each of these traditions is also advanced and supported
though scholarly exchange at various professional societies, including
the Society for Women in Philosophy, founded in the United States in
1972. Additionally, the Society for Analytical Feminism, founded in
1991, promotes the study of issues in feminism by methods broadly
construed as analytic, to examine the use of analytic methods as
applied to feminist issues, and to provide a means by which those
interested in analytical feminism can meet and exchange ideas. The
journal
philo
SOPHIA was established in 2005 to promote
continental feminist scholarly and pedagogical development. The
Society for the Study of Women Philosophers was established in 1987 to
promote the study of the contributions of women to the history of
philosophy. Similar organizations and journals on many continents
continue to advance scholarship in feminist philosophy. Often a
feminist philosophical society will publish its own journal, just as
the International Network on Feminist Approaches to Bioethics
publishes the
International Journal of Feminist Approaches to
Bioethics.
While the discipline of philosophy in the West remains
predominantly white and male, feminist journals and scholarship
continues to proliferate.
3. Approaches to Feminism
Important feminist philosophical work has emerged from all the current
major philosophical traditions, including analytic philosophy,
continental philosophy, and American pragmatist philosophy. It is also
emerging from other new areas of inquiry, such as Latin American
thought, which arises out of the context of colonialism. Entries in
the SEP under the heading “approaches to feminism” discuss
the impact of these traditions and constellations of thought on
feminist scholarship. The subsection also addresses how some work,
such as psychoanalytic feminism, bridges two or more traditions. The
editors of the feminist section of the SEP see these different
traditions as a rich array of methodologies rather than “continental
divides.” The array reflects a variety of beliefs about what kinds of
philosophy are both fruitful and meaningful. The different
methodologies bring their own ways of asking and answering questions,
along with constructive and critical dialogue with mainstream
philosophical views and methods and new topics of inquiry.
As the SEP continues to grow, we anticipate that this subsection on
approaches to feminism will expand to address other traditions,
including Black feminism. But for now, here are links to entries in
this subsection:
analytic feminism
continental feminism
Latin American feminism
pragmatist feminism
intersections between pragmatist and continental feminism
intersections between analytic and continental feminism
psychoanalytic feminism
Though not included along with these in the table of contents, another
relevant approach can be found in the entry on
gender in Confucian philosophy
.
All these approaches share a set of feminist commitments and an
overarching criticism of institutions, presuppositions, and practices
that have historically favored men over women. They also share a
general critique of claims to universality and objectivity that ignore
male-dominated theories’ own particularity and specificity.
Feminist philosophies of almost any philosophical orientation will be
much more perspectival, historical, contextual, and focused on lived
experience than their non-feminist counterparts. Unlike mainstream
philosophers who can seriously consider the philosophical conundrums
of brains in a vat, feminist philosophers always start by seeing
people as embodied. Feminists have also argued for the reconfiguration
of accepted structures and problems of philosophy. For example,
feminists have not only rejected the privileging of epistemological
concerns over moral and political concerns common to much of
philosophy, they have argued that these two areas of concern are
inextricably intertwined. Part 2 of the entry on
analytic feminism
lays out other areas of commonality across these various approaches.
For one, feminist philosophers generally agree that philosophy is a
powerful tool for, as Ann Garry states in that entry,
“understanding ourselves and our relations to each other, to our
communities, and to the state; to appreciate the extent to which we
are counted as knowers and moral agents; [and] to uncover the
assumptions and methods of various bodies of knowledge.” As
such, philosophy is also a powerful tool for understanding how gender
itself has been constructed, that is, why and to whose benefit it is
to construct some people as lesser and less capable than others. Along
these lines, feminist philosophers are keenly attuned to male biases
at work in the history of philosophy, such as those regarding
“the nature of woman” and supposed value neutrality, which
on inspection is hardly neutral at all. Claims to universality,
feminist philosophers have found, are usually made from a very
specific and particular point of view, contrary to their manifest
assertions. Another orientation that feminist philosophers generally
share is a commitment to normativity and social change; they are never
content to analyze things just as they are but instead look for ways
to overcome oppressive practices and institutions.
Such questioning of the problems of mainstream approaches to
philosophy has often led to feminists using methods and approaches
from more than one philosophical tradition. As Ann Garry notes in Part
3 of the entry on
analytic feminism
(2017), it is not uncommon to find analytic feminists drawing on
non-analytic figures such as Beauvoir, Foucault, or Butler; and
because of their motivation to communicate with other feminists, they
are more motivated than other philosophers “to search for
methodological cross-fertilization.” Moreover, feminist
philosophers are generally inclined to incorporate the perspectives of
all those who have been oppressed.
Even with their common and overlapping orientations, the differences
between the various philosophical approaches to feminism are
significant, especially in terms of styles of writing, influences, and
overall expectations about what philosophy can and should achieve.
Analytic feminist philosophy tends to value analysis and
argumentation, though anyone trained in philosophy does so as well.
Continental feminist theory puts more emphasis on interpretation and
deconstruction, and pragmatist feminism values lived experience and
exploration. Coming out of a post-Hegelian tradition, both continental
and pragmatist philosophers usually suspect that “truth,”
whatever that is, emerges and develops historically. They tend to
share with Nietzsche the view that truth claims often mask power
plays. Yet where continental and pragmatist philosophers are generally
wary about notions of truth, analytic feminists tend to argue that the
way to “counter sexism and androcentrism is through forming a
clear conception of and pursuing truth, logical consistency,
objectivity, rationality, justice, and the good.” (Cudd 1996:
20).
These differences and intersections play out in the ways that various
feminists engage topics of common concern. One key area of
intersection, noted by Georgia Warnke, is the appropriation of
psychoanalytic theory, with Anglo-American feminists generally
adopting object-relations theories and continental feminists drawing
more on Lacan and contemporary French psychoanalytic theory, though
this is already beginning to change as it becomes clearer that
continental psychoanalytic theory is also interested, via Julia
Kristeva and Melanie Klein, in object-relations theory (see the entry
on
intersections between analytic and continental feminism
).
 The importance of psychoanalytic approaches is also underscored in
Shannon Sullivan’s entry on
intersections between pragmatist and continental feminism
.
 Given the importance of
psychoanalytic feminism
for all three traditions, a separate essay on this approach to
feminist theory is included in this section.
No topic is more central to feminist philosophy than sex and gender,
but even here many variations on the theme flourish. Where analytic
feminism, with its critique of essentialism, holds the sex/gender
distinction practically as an article of faith (see the entry on
feminist perspectives on sex and gender
and Chanter 2009), continental feminists tend to suspect either (1)
that even the supposedly purely biological category of sex is itself
socially constituted (Butler 1990 and 1993) or (2) that sexual
difference itself needs to be valued and theorized (see especially
Cixous 1976 and Irigaray 1974).
Despite the variety of different approaches, styles, societies, and
orientations, feminist philosophers’ commonalities are greater
than their differences. Many will borrow freely from each other and
find that other orientations contribute to their own work. Even the
differences over sex and gender add to a larger conversation about the
impact of culture and society on bodies, experience, and pathways for
change.
4. Interventions in Philosophy
Philosophers who are feminists have, in their work in traditional
fields of study, begun to change those very fields. The
Encyclopedia
includes a range of entries on how feminist
philosophies have intervened in conventional areas of philosophical
research, areas in which philosophers often tend to argue that they
are operating from a neutral, universal point of view (notable
exceptions are pragmatism, poststructuralism, and some phenomenology).
Historically, philosophy has claimed that the norm is universal and
the feminine is abnormal, that universality is not gendered, but that
all things feminine are not universal. Not surprisingly, feminists
have pointed out how in fact these supposed neutral enterprises are in
fact quite gendered, namely, male gendered. For example, feminists
working on environmental philosophy have uncovered how practices
disproportionately affect women, children, and people of color.
Liberal feminism has shown how supposed universal truths of liberalism
are in fact quite biased and particular. Feminist epistemologists have
called out “epistemologies of ignorance” that traffic in
not knowing. Across the board, in fact, feminist philosophers are
uncovering male biases and also pointing to the value of
particularity, in general rejecting universality as a norm or
goal.
Entries under the heading of feminist interventions include the
following:
feminist aesthetics
feminist bioethics
feminist environmental philosophy
feminist epistemology and philosophy of science
feminist ethics
feminist history of philosophy
liberal feminism
feminist metaphysics
feminist moral psychology
feminist philosophy of biology
feminist philosophy of language
feminist philosophy of law
feminist philosophy of religion
feminist political philosophy
feminist social epistemology
5. Topics in Feminism
Feminist critical attention to philosophical practices has revealed
the inadequacy of dominant philosophical tropes as well as the need to
turn philosophical attention to things that had previously gone
unattended. For example, feminists working from the perspective of
women’s lives have been influential in bringing philosophical
attention to the phenomenon of care and care-giving (Ruddick 1989;
Held 1995, 2007; Hamington 2006), dependency (Kittay 1999), disability
(Wilkerson 2002; Carlson 2009), women’s labor (Waring 1999;
Delphy 1984; Harley 2007), the devaluation of women’s
testimonies (see the entry on
feminist epistemology and philosophy of science
),
 and scientific bias and objectivity (Longino 1990). In doing so they
have revealed weaknesses in existing ethical, political, and
epistemological theories. More generally, feminists have called for
inquiry into what are typically considered “private”
practices and personal concerns, such as the family, sexuality, and
the body, in order to balance what has seemed to be a masculine
pre-occupation with “public” and impersonal matters.
Philosophy presupposes interpretive tools for understanding our
everyday lives; feminist work in articulating additional dimensions of
experience and aspects of our practices is invaluable in demonstrating
the bias in existing tools, and in the search for better ones.
Feminist explanations of sexism and accounts of sexist practices also
raise issues that are within the domain of traditional philosophical
inquiry. For example, in thinking about care, feminists have asked
questions about the nature of the self; in thinking about gender,
feminists have asked what the relationship is between the natural and
the social; in thinking about sexism in science, feminists have asked
what should count as knowledge. In some such cases, mainstream
philosophical accounts provide useful tools; in other cases,
alternative proposals have seemed more promising.
In the sub-entries included under “feminism (topics)” in
the
Table of Contents
to this
Encyclopedia
, authors survey some of the recent
feminist work on a topic, highlighting the issues that are of
particular relevance to philosophy. These entries are:
feminist perspectives on argumentation
feminist perspectives on autonomy
feminist perspectives on class and work
feminist perspectives on disability
feminist perspectives on globalization
feminist perspectives on objectification
feminist perspectives on power
feminist perspectives on rape
feminist perspectives on reproduction and the family
feminist perspectives on science
feminist perspectives on sex and gender
feminist perspectives on sex markets
feminist perspectives on the body
feminist perspectives on the self
feminist perspectives on trans issues
See also the entries in the
Related Entries section
below.
Bibliography
Ahmed, Sara, 2006,
Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects,
Others
, Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Alaimo, Stacy and Susan Hekman, 2007,
Material Feminisms
,
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Alanen, Lily and Charlotte Witt (eds.), 2004,
Feminist
Reflections on the History of Philosophy
,
Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Alcoff, Linda Martín, 2005,
Visible Identities: Race,
Gender, and the Self
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Allen, Amy, 2008,
The Politics of Our Selves: Power, Autonomy,
and Gender in Contemporary Critical Theory
, New York: Columbia
University Press.
Alexander, M. Jacqui and Lisa Albrecht(eds.), 1998,
The Third
Wave: Feminist Perspectives on Racism
, New York: Kitchen Table:
Women of Color Press.
Anderson, Elizabeth S., 1999, “What is the Point of
Equality?”
Ethics
, 109(2): 287–337.
doi:10.1086/233897
Anzaldúa, Gloria (ed.), 1990,
Making Face, Making Soul:
Haciendo Caras
, San Francisco: Aunt Lute Books.
Atherton, Margaret (ed.), 1994,
Women Philosophers of the
Early Modern Period
, Indianapolis: Hackett.
Baier, Annette C., 1994,
Moral Prejudices: Essays on
Ethics
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Barker, Drucilla and Edith Kuiper (eds.), 2010,
Feminist
Economics
, New York: Routledge.
Barrett, Michèle, 1991,
The Politics of Truth: From
Marx to Foucault
, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Bartky, Sandra Lee, 1988, “Foucault, Femininity, and the
Modernization of Patriarchal Power”, in
Feminism and
Foucault: Reflections on Resistance
, Irene Diamond and Lee Quimby
(eds), Northeastern University Press, pp. 61–86. Reprinted in in
her 1990
Femininity and Domination: Studies in the Phenomenology
of Oppression
, New York: Routledge, 63–82.
Basu, Amrita, 1995,
The Challenge of Local Feminisms:
Women’s Movements in Global Perspective
, Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Battersby, Christine, 2007,
The Sublime, Terror and Human
Difference
, New York: Routledge.
Baumgardner, Jennifer and Amy Richards, 2000,
Manifesta: Young
Women, Feminism, and the Future
, New York: Farrar, Straus, and
Giroux.
Beauvoir, Simone de, 1949,
Le Deuxième Sexe
, 2
volumes, Paris: Gallimard. Printed in English 1953 as
The Second
Sex
by H.M. Parshley (trans. and ed.), New York: Knopf.
Retranslated 2009 by Constance Borde and Sheila Malovany-Chevallier,
London: Jonathan Cape.
Bell, Linda, 2003,
Beyond the Margins: Reflections of a
Feminist Philosopher
, New York: SUNY Press.
Benhabib, Seyla, 1992,
Situating the Self: Gender, Community,
and Postmodernism in Contemporary Ethics
, New York:
Routledge.
Bergmann, Barbara, 2002,
The Economic Emergence of Women
,
second edition, New York: Palgrave, St. Martin’s Press.
Bergoffen, Debra B., 1996,
The Philosophy of Simone de
Beauvoir: Gendered Phenomenologies, Erotic Generosities
, New
York: SUNY Press.
Breines, Wini, 2002, “What’s Love Got to Do with It?
White Women, Black Women, and Feminism in the Movement Years”,
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society
, 27(4):
1095–1133. doi:10.1086/339634
Butler, Judith, 1990,
Gender Trouble: Feminism and the
Subversion of Identity
, New York: Routledge.
–––, 1993,
Bodies that Matter: On the
Discursive Limits of “Sex”
, New York: Routledge.
Calhoun, Cheshire, 2000,
Feminism, the Family, and the
Politics of the Closet: Lesbian and Gay Displacement
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/0199257663.001.0001
–––, 1989, “Responsibility and
Reproach”.
Ethics
, 99(2): 389–406.
doi:10.1086/293071
Campbell, Sue, Letitia Meynell and Susan Sherwin (eds.), 2009,
Embodiment and Agency
, University Park, PA: Penn State
Press.
Carlson, Licia, 2009,
The Faces of Intellectual Disability:
Philosophical Reflections
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Chanter, Tina (ed.), 2009,
Rethinking Sex and Gender
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cimitile, Maria, 2007,
Returning to Irigaray: Feminist
Philosophy, Politics, and the Question of Unity
, Albany, NY:
State University of New York Press.
Cixous, Hélène, “The Laugh of the
Medusa,” translated, Keith Cohen and Paula Cohen,
Signs
, Summer 1976, pp. 875–893.
Code, Lorraine, 2006,
Ecological Thinking: The Politics of
Epistemic Location
, New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0195159438.001.0001
–––, 1991,
What Can She Know? Feminist
Theory and the Construction of Knowledge
, Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Cott, Nancy, 1987,
The Grounding of Modern Feminism
, New
Haven: Yale University Press.
Collins, Patricia Hill, 1990,
Black Feminist Thought
,
Boston, MA: Unwin Hyman.
Crasnow, Sharon L. and Anita M. Superson (eds.), 2012,
Out
from the Shadows: Analytical Feminist Contributions to Traditional
Philosophy
, New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199855469.001.0001
Crenshaw, Kimberlé, 1991, “Mapping the Margins:
Intersectionality, Identity Politics, and Violence Against Women of
Color”.
Stanford Law Review
, 43(6): 1241–1299.
doi:10.2307/1229039
Crenshaw, Kimberlé, Neil Gotanda, Gary Peller, and Kendall
Thomas, 1995, “Introduction”, in
Critical Race
Theory
, Kimberlé Crenshaw, et al. (ed.), New York: The New
Press, xiii–xxxii.
Crow, Barbara, 2000,
Radical Feminism: A Documentary
Reader
, New York: New York University Press.
Cudd, Ann E., 1996, “Analytic Feminism”, in
The
Encyclopedia of Philosophy Supplement
, Donald M. Borchert (ed.),
New York: Macmillan Reference, pp. 20–21.
–––, 2006,
Analyzing Oppression
, New
York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/0195187431.001.0001
Cudd, Ann E. and Robin O. Andreasen (eds.), 2005,
Feminist
Theory: A Philosophical Anthology
, Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishing.
Davis, Angela, 1983,
Women, Race and Class
, New York:
Random House.
Davis, Lennard J., 2010,
The Disability Studies Reader
,
third edition, New York: Routledge.
Delmar, Rosalind, 1986, “What is Feminism?” Juliet
Mitchell and Ann Oakley (eds),
What is Feminism?
, New York:
Pantheon Books. Reprinted in Herrmann and Stewart 1994:
5–28.
Delphy, Christine, 1984,
Close to Home: A Materialist Analysis
of Women’s Oppression
, Diane Leonard (trans.), Amherst, MA:
University of Massachusetts Press.
Deutscher, Penelope, 1997,
Yielding Gender: Feminism,
Deconstruction, and the History of Philosophy
, London:
Routledge.
Duplessis, Rachel Blau, and Ann Snitow (eds), 1998,
The
Feminist Memoir Project: Voices from Women’s Liberation
,
New York: Random House (Crown Publishing).
Dutt, Malika, 1998, “Reclaiming a Human Rights Culture:
Feminism of Difference and Alliance”, in
Talking Visions:
Multicultural Feminism in a Transnational Age
, Ella Shohat (ed.),
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 225–246.
Dykeman, Therese Boos (ed.), 1999,
The Neglected Canon: Nine
Women Philosophers First to the Twentieth Century
,
Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Echols, Alice, 1990,
Daring to Be Bad: Radical Feminism in
America, 1967–75
, Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.
Engels, Friedrich, 1845 [1972],
The Origin of the Family,
Private Property, and the State
, New York: International
Publishers.
Enloe, Cynthia, 2007,
Globalization and Militarism: Feminists
Make the Link
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Farr, Kathryn, 2004,
Sex Trafficking: The Global Market in
Women and Children
, New York: Worth Publishing.
Findlen, Barbara, 2001,
Listen Up: Voices from the Next
Feminist Generation
, second edition, Seattle, WA: Seal
Press.
Fine, Michelle and Adrienne Asch (eds.), 1988,
Women with
Disabilities: Essays in Psychology, Culture, and Politics
,
Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Firestone, Shulamith, 1970,
The Dialectic of Sex: The Case for
Feminist Revolution
, New York: Bantam.
Folbre, Nancy, 2010,
Greed, Lust, and Gender: A History of
Economic Ideas
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fraser, Nancy, 1989,
Unruly Practices: Power, Discourse, and
Gender in Contemporary Social Theory
, Minneapolis, MN: University
of Minnesota Press.
Fraser, Nancy and Linda Nicholson, 1990, “Social Criticism
without Philosophy: An Encounter Between Feminism and
Postmodernism”, in
Feminism/Postmodernism
, Linda
Nicholson (ed.), New York: Routledge.
Fricker, Miranda and Jennifer Hornsby, 2000,
The Cambridge
Companion ot Feminism in Philosophy
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. doi:10.1017/CCOL0521624517
Friedan, Betty, 1963,
The Feminine Mystique
, New York:
Norton.
Frye, Marilyn, 1983,
The Politics of Reality
, Freedom,
CA: The Crossing Press.
Garavaso, Pieranna (ed.), 2018,
The Bloomsbury Companion to
Analytic Feminism
, London: Bloomsbury.
Gardner, Catherine Villanueva, 2000,
Rediscovering Women
Philosophers: Philosophical Genre and the Boundaries of
Philosophy
, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Garland-Thomson, Rosemarie, 1997,
Extraordinary Bodies:
Figuring Physical Disability in American Culture and Literature
,
New York: Columbia University Press.
Garry, Ann, “Analytic Feminism”,
The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Spring 2017 Edition), Edward N. Zalta
(ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2017/entries/femapproach-analytic/
>.
Garry, Ann, Serene J. Khader, and Alison Stone (eds.), 2017,
The Routledge Companion to Feminist Philosophy
, New York:
Routledge.
Gould, Carol and Marx Wartofsky (eds.), 1976,
Women and
Philosophy: Toward a Theory of Liberation
, University Park, PA:
Penn State Press.
Grasswick, Heidi (ed.), 2011,
Feminist Epistemology and
Philosophy of Science: Power in Knowledge
, New York: Springer.
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6835-5
Green, Joyce (ed.), 2007,
Making Space for Indigenous
Feminism
, London: Zed Books.
Grewal, Inderpal, 1998, “On the New Global Feminism and the
Family of Nations: Dilemmas of Transnational Feminist Practice”,
in
Talking Visions: Multicultural Feminism in a Transnational
Age
, Ella Shohat (ed.), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
501–530.
Grosz, Elizabeth, 1994,
Volatile Bodies: Toward a Corporal
Feminism
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Hall, Kim Q. and Ásta (eds.), 2021,
The Oxford Handbook
of Feminist Philosophy
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Hamington, Maurice, 2004,
Embodied Care: Jane Addams, Maurice
Merleau-Ponty, and Feminist Ethics
, Urbana, IL: University of
Illinois Press.
–––, 2006,
Socializing Care: Feminist Ethics
and Public Issues
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Hamington, Maurice and Celia Bardwell-Jones (eds.), 2012,
Contemporary Pragmatist Feminism
, New York: Routledge.
Hampton, Jean, 1993, “Feminist Contractarianism”, in
Louise M. Antony and Charlotte Witt (eds)
A Mind of One’s
Own: Feminist Essays on Reason and Objectivity
, Boulder, CO:
Westview Press.
Harding, Sandra, 1986,
The Science Question in Feminism
,
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Harley, Sharon (ed.) 2007.
Women’s Labor in the Global
Economy: Speaking in Multiple Voices
, New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers
University Press.
Haslanger, Sally, 2004, “Oppressions: Racial and
Other”, in
Racism, Philosophy and Mind: Philosophical
Explanations of Racism and Its Implications
, Michael Levine and
Tamas Pataki (eds), Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
–––, 2012,
Resisting Reality: Social
Construction and Social Critique
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199892631.001.0001
Held, Virginia, 1993,
Feminist Morality: Transforming Culture,
Society, and Politics
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
–––, 1995,
Justice and Care: Essential
Readings in Feminist Ethics
, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
–––, 2007,
The Ethics of Care: Personal,
Political, Global
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0195180992.001.0001
Heldke, Lisa and Peg O’Connor (eds.), 2004,
Oppression,
Privilege, and Resistance: Theoretical Perspectives on Racism, Sexism,
and Heterosexism
, New York: McGraw Hill.
Hernandez, Daisy and Bushra Rehman (eds.), 2002,
Colonize
This! Young Women of Color in Today’s Feminism
, Berkeley,
CA: Seal Press.
Herrmann, Anne C. and Abigail J. Stewart (eds.), 1994,
Theorizing Feminism: Parallel Trends in the Humanities and Social
Sciences
, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Heyes, Cressida J., 2007,
Self-Transformations: Foucault,
Ethics, and Normalized Bodies
, New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195310535.001.0001
Heywood, Leslie and Jennifer Drake (eds.), 1997,
Third Wave
Agenda: Being Feminist, Doing Feminism
. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
Hillyer, Barbara, 1993,
Feminism and Disability
, Norman,
OK: University of Oklahoma Press.
Hoagland, Sarah L., 1989,
Lesbian Ethics: Toward New
Values
, Palo Alto, CA: Institute for Lesbian Studies.
hooks, bell, 1981,
Ain’t I A Woman: Black Women and
Feminism
, Boston, MA: South End Press.
–––, 1984,
Feminist Theory from Margin to
Center
, Boston, MA: South End Press.
–––, 1989,
Talking Back: Thinking Feminist,
Thinking Black
, Boston, MA: South End Press.
Hurtado, Aída, 1996,
The Color of Privilege: Three
Blasphemies on Race and Feminism
, Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Irigaray, Luce, 1974 [1985],
Speculum de l’autre
femme
, Les Editions de Minuit. Translated as
Speculum of the
Other Woman
, Gillian C. Gill (trans.), Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press.
Jaggar, Alison M., 1983,
Feminist Politics and Human
Nature
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
–––, 1994,
Controversies within Feminist
Social Ethics
, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
James, Susan, 1998, “Feminism”, in Edward Craig (ed.),
Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy
, Vol. 10, London:
Routledge, p. 576.
Kempadoo, Kamala (ed.), 2005,
Trafficking and Prostitution
Reconsidered: New Perspectives on Migration, Sex Work, and Human
Rights
, Boulder, CO: Paradigm Publishers.
Kiss, Elizabeth, 1995, “Feminism and Rights”,
Dissent
, 42(3): 342–347
Kittay, Eva Feder, 1999,
Love’s Labor: Essays on Women,
Equality and Dependency
, New York: Routledge.
Kofman, Sarah, 1980 [1985],
L’énigme de la femme:
La femme dans les textes de Freud
, Paris: Galilée.
Translated as
The Enigma of Woman: Women in Freud’s
Writings
, Catherine Porter (trans.), Ithaca, NY: Cornell
University Press, 1985.
–––, 1989 [1998],
Socrate(s)
.
Translated as
Socrates: Fictions of a Philosopher
, Catherine
Porter (trans.), Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998.
Kourany, Janet, 1998,
Philosophy in a Feminist Voice
,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Le Dœuff, Michèle, 1980 [1989],
Recherches sur
l’imaginaire philosophique
, Paris: Payot. Translated as
The Philosophical Imaginary
, Colin Gordon (trans.), Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 1989.
Lloyd, Genevieve, 1984,
The Man of Reason: ‘Male’
and ‘Female’ in Western Philosophy
, Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press.
–––, 2001,
Feminism and the History of
Philosophy
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Kymlicka, Will, 1989,
Liberalism, Community and Culture
,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Longino, Helen, 1990,
Science as Social Knowledge
,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lugones, María, 2003,
Pilgrimages/Peregrinajes:
Theorizing Coalition against Multiple Oppressions
, Lanham, MD:
Rowman and Littlefield.
Mackenzie, Catriona and Natalie Stoljar(eds.), 2000,
Relational Autonomy: Feminist perspectives on Autonomy, Agency and
the Social Self
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
MacKinnon, Catharine, 1987,
Feminism Unmodified
,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
–––, 1989,
Towards a Feminist Theory of the
State
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Mann, Bonnie, 2006,
Women’s Liberation and the Sublime:
Feminism, Postmodernism, Environment
, New York: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/0195187458.001.0001
May, Vivian M., 2007,
Anna Julia Cooper, Visionary Black
Feminist: A Critical Introduction
, New York: Routledge.
McRuer, Robert and Abby Wilkerson (eds.), 2003, “Desiring
Disability: Queer Theory Meets Disability Studies”, Special
Issue
Gay and Lesbian Quarterly
, 9(1–2).
McAfee, Noëlle, 2003,
Julia Kristeva
, New York:
Routledge.
–––, 2021,
Feminism: A Quick Immersion
,
New York: Tibidabo Publishing, Inc.
McWhorter, Ladelle, 2009,
Racism and Sexual Oppression in
Anglo-America: A Genealogy
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Millett, Kate, 1970,
Sexual Politics
, Garden City, NY:
Doubleday.
Moghadam, Valentine M., 2005,
Globalizing Women: Transnational
Feminist Networks
, Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins.
Mohanty, Chandra, Ann Russo, and Lourdes Torres (eds), 1991,
Third World Women and the Politics of Feminism
, Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press.
Molyneux, Maxine and Nikki Craske (eds.), 2001,
Gender and the
Politics of Rights and Democracy in Latin America
, Basingstoke:
Palgrave McMillan.
Moody-Adams, Michele, 1997,
Fieldwork in Familiar Places:
Morality, Culture and Philosophy
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Moraga, Cherríe, 1983, “From a Long Line of Vendidas:
Chicanas and Feminism”, in her
Loving in the War Years: Lo
que nunca pasó sus labios
, Boston, MA: South End Press,
pp. 90–144.
Moraga, Cherrie and Gloria Anzaldúa (eds), 1981,
This
Bridge Called My Back: Writings of Radical Women of Color
,
Watertown, MA: Persephone Press.
Oliver, Kelly, 2004,
Colonization of Psychic Space: A
Psychoanalytic Theory of Oppression
, Minneapolis, MN: University
of Minnesota Press.
Narayan, Uma, 1997,
Dislocating Cultures: Identities,
Traditions, and Third World Feminism
, New York: Routledge.
Narayan, Uma and Sandra Harding (eds.), 2000,
De-centering the
Center: Philosophy for a Multicultural, Postcolonial, and Feminist
World
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Nussbaum, Martha C., 1995, “Human Capabilities, Female Human
Beings”, in
Women, Culture and Development: A Study of Human
Capabilities
, Martha Nussbaum and Jonathan Glover (eds), Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 61–104.
–––, 1999,
Sex and Social Justice
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Brien, Mary, 1979, “Reproducing Marxist Man”,
in
The Sexism of Social and Political Theory: Women and
Reproduction from Plato to Nietzsche
, Lorenne M. G. Clark and
Lynda Lange (eds), Toronto: Toronto University Press, 99–116.
Reprinted in Tuana and Tong 1995: 91–103.
O’Connor, Peg, 2008,
Morality and Our Complicated Form
of Life: Feminist Wittgensteinian Metaethics
, University Park,
PA: Penn State Press.
Okin, Susan Moller, 1979,
Women in Western Political
Thought
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
–––, 1989,
Justice, Gender, and the
Family
, New York: Basic Books.
Ong, Aihwa, 1988, “Colonialism and Modernity: Feminist
Re-presentation of Women in Non-Western Societies”.
Inscriptions
, 3(4): 90. Reprinted in Herrmann and Stewart
1994.
Pateman, Carole, 1988,
The Sexual Contract
, Palo Alto,
CA: Stanford University Press.
Postl, Gertrude, 2017, “Language, Writing, and Gender
Differences”, in Garry et al. 2017: 293–302.
Reagon, Bernice Johnson, 1983, “Coalition Politics: Turning
the Century”, in
Home Girls: A Black Feminist
Anthology
, Barbara Smith (ed.), New York: Kitchen Table: Women of
Color Press, 356–368.
Robinson, Fiona, 1999,
Globalizing Care: Ethics, Feminist
Theory, and International Affairs
, Boulder, CO: Westview
Press.
Rowe, C., 2012,
Plato, Republic
, translated, with an
introduction and notes, New York: Penguin Books.
Rubin, Gayle, 1975, “The Traffic in Women: Notes on the
’Political Economy’ of Sex”, in
Towards an
Anthropology of Women
, Rayna Rapp Reiter (ed.), New York: Monthly
Review Press, 157–210.
Ruddick, Sara, 1989,
Maternal Thinking: Towards a Politics of
Peace
, Boston: Beacon Press.
Salamon, Gayle, 2010,
Assuming a Body: Transgender and
Rhetorics of Mutuality
, New York: Columbia University Press.
Scheman, Naomi, 1993,
Engenderings: Constructions of
Knowledge, Authority, and Privilege
, New York: Routledge.
Schneir, Miriam, 1972,
Feminism: The Essential Historical
Writings
, New York: Vintage Books.
––– (ed.), 1994,
Feminism in Our Time: The
Essential Writings, World War II to the Present
, New York:
Vintage Books.
Schott, Robin May, 2003,
Discovering Feminist Philosophy
,
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Schwartzman, Lisa H., 2006,
Challenging Liberalism: Feminism
as Political Critique
, University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State
University Press.
Scott, Joan W., 1988, “Deconstructing
Equality-Versus-Difference: Or the Uses of Poststructuralist Theory
for Feminism”.
Feminist Studies
, 14(1): 33–50.
doi:10.2307/3177997
Seigfried, Charlene Haddock, 1996,
Feminism and Pragmatism:
Reweaving the Social Fabric
, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Shrage, Laurie J., 2009,
You’ve Changed: Sex
Reassignment and Personal Identity
, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Silvers, Anita, David Wasserman, Mary Mahowald, 1999,
Disability, Difference, Discrimination: Perspectives on Justice in
Bioethics and Public Policy
, Lanham, MD: Rowman &
Littlefield.
Simpson, J. A. and E. S. C. Weiner (ed.), 1989,
Oxford English
Dictionary
, second edition, Oxford: Clarendon Press. OED Online.
Oxford University Press. “feminism, n1” (1851).
Snitow, Ann, 1990, “A Gender Diary”, in
Conflicts
in Feminism
, M. Hirsch and E. Fox Keller (eds), New York:
Routledge, 9–43.
Spelman, Elizabeth, 1988,
Inessential Woman: Problems of
Exclusion in Feminist Thought
, Boston: Beacon Press.
Springer, Kimberly, 2002, “Third Wave Black Feminism?”
Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society
, 27(4):
1060–1082. doi:10.1086/339636
Stone, Alison, 2005,
Luce Irigaray and the Philosophy of
Sexual Difference
, New York: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511617287
Sullivan, Shannon, 2006,
Revealing Whiteness: The Unconscious
Habits of Racial Privilege
, Bloomington, IN: Indiana University
Press.
Superson, Anita M., 2009,
The Moral Skeptic
, New York:
Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195376623.001.0001
Tanner, Leslie B. 1970
Voices from Women’s
Liberation
, New York: New American Library (A Mentor Book).
Taylor, Vesta and Leila J. Rupp, 1996, “Lesbian Existence
and the Women’s Movement: Researching the ‘Lavender
Herring’”, in
Feminism and Social Change
, Heidi
Gottfried (ed.), Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Tessman, Lisa, 2005,
Burdened Virtues: Virtue Ethics for
Liberatory Struggles
, New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0195179145.001.0001
Tong, Rosemarie, 1993,
Feminine and Feminist Ethics
,
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Tougas, Cecile T., and Sara Ebenrick (eds.), 2000,
Presenting
Women Philosophers
, Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Tuana, Nancy (ed.), 1992,
Woman and the History of
Philosophy
, New York: Paragon Press.
Tuana, Nancy (ed.), 1994, Feminist Interpretations of Plato,
University Park: Penn State Press.
Tuana, Nancy and Rosemarie Tong (eds), 1995,
Feminism and
Philosophy
, Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Waithe, Mary Ellen (ed.), 1987–1994,
A History of Women
Philosophers
, 4 volumes, Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
1987,
Ancient Women Philosophers, 600 B.C.–500
A.D.
, volume 1. doi:10.1007/978-94-009-3497-9
1989,
Medieval, Renaissance, and Enlightenment Women
Philosophers, 500–1600
, volume 2.
doi:10.1007/978-94-009-2551-9
1990,
Modern Women Philosophers, 1600–1900
, volume
3. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-3790-4
1994,
Contemporary Women Philosophers, 1900–Today
,
volume 4. doi:10.1007/978-94-011-1114-0
Walker, Alice, 1990, “Definition of Womanist”, in
Making Face, Making Soul: Haciendo Caras
, Gloria
Anzaldúa (ed.), San Francisco: Aunt Lute Books, 370.
Walker, Margaret Urban, 1998,
Moral Understandings: A Feminist
Study in Ethics
, New York: Routledge.
––– (ed), 1999,
Mother Time: Women, Aging,
and Ethics
, Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Walker, Rebecca (ed.), 1995,
To Be Real: Telling the Truth and
Changing the Face of Feminism
, New York: Random House (Anchor
Books).
Ward, Julia, 1996,
Feminism and Ancient Philosophy
, New
York: Routledge.
Ware, Cellestine, 1970,
Woman Power: The Movement for
Women’s Liberation
, New York: Tower Publications.
Waring, Marilyn, 1999,
Counting for Nothing: What Men Value
and What Women Are Worth
, second edition, Toronto: University of
Toronto Press.
Weisberg, D. Kelly (ed.) 1993.
Feminist Legal Theory:
Foundations
, Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Wendell, Susan, 1996,
The Rejected Body: Feminist
Philosophical Reflections on Disability
, New York and London:
Routledge.
Wilkerson, Abby L., 2002, “Disability, Sex Radicalism, and
the Problem of Political Agency”.
NWSA Journal
, 14(3):
33–57. doi:10.1353/nwsa.2003.0018
Whisnant, Rebecca, 2010,
Global Feminist Ethics
, Lanham,
MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Winnubst, Shannon, 2006,
Queering Freedom
, Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press.
Young, Iris M., 1985 [1990], “Humanism, Gynocentrism and
Feminist Politics”,
Women’s Studies International
Forum
, 8(3): 173–183. Reprinted in Young 1990a:
73–91. doi:10.1016/0277-5395(85)90040-8
–––, 1990a,
Throwing Like a Girl and Other
Essays in Feminist Philosophy and Social Theory
, Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.
–––, 1990b,
Justice and the Politics of
Difference
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
–––, 2011,
Responsibility for Justice
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195392388.001.0001
Zophy, Angela Howard, 1990, “Feminism”, in
The
Handbook of American Women’s History
, Angela Howard Zophy
and Frances M. Kavenik (eds), New York: Routledge (Garland Reference
Library of the Humanities).
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Resources listed below have been chosen to provide only a springboard
into the huge amount of feminist material available on the web. The
emphasis here is on general resources useful for doing research in
feminist philosophy or interdisciplinary feminist theory, e.g., the
links connect to bibliographies and meta-sites, and resources
concerning inclusion, exclusion, and feminist diversity. The list is
incomplete and will be regularly revised and expanded. Further
resources on topics in feminism such as popular culture, reproductive
rights, sex work, are available within each sub-entry on that
topic.
General
Feminist Theory Website
Women and Social Movements in the US: 1600–2000
The Path of the Women’s Rights Movement: Detailed Timeline 1848–1997
Documents from the Women’s Liberation Movement (Duke Univ. Archives)
Documenting Difference: An Illustrated & Annotated Anthology of Documents on Race, Class, Gender & Ethnicity in the United States
Race, Gender, and Affirmative Action Resource Page
Associations
The Society for Women in Philosophy (SWIP)
Association for Feminist Ethics and Social Theory (FEAST)
Feminist Epistemology, Metaphysics, Methodology, and Science
Studies (FEMMSS)
http://femmss.org/
Feminist Theory Website (Introduction)
philoSOPHIA: A Feminist Society
Society for Analytical Feminism
The Society for the Study of Women Philosophers
“Waves” of Feminism
“Waves of Feminism”
by Jo Freeman (1996).
Winning the Vote
(Western NY Suffragists).
Amendments to the US Constitution: 13th, 14th, 15th, 18th, 19th, 21st
NOW’s 1966 Statement of Purpose
“The Women’s Liberation Movement: Its Origins, Structures, and Ideals”
by Jo Freeman (1971).
Feminism and Class
Marxist, Socialist, and Materialist Feminisms
WMST-L discussion of how to define “Marxist feminism”
Aug 1994)
Marxist/Materialist Feminism
(Feminist Theory Website)
A Marxist Feminist Critique
Feminist Economics
Feminist Economics
(Feminist Theory Website)
International Association for Feminist Economics
International Center for Research on Women
Women and Labor
Rights for Working Women
United States Department of Labor
United States Department of Labor: Audience – Women
,
 a shortcut to information and services the Department of Labor (DOL)
offers for women.
Feminism and Disability
Center for Research on Women with Disabilities
(CROWD)
Feminism, Human Rights, Global Feminism, and Human Trafficking
Global Feminism
(Feminist Majority Foundation)
NOW and Global Feminism
UN Women
Sisterhood is Global Institute
Polaris Project
Not For Sale Campaign
Human Trafficking Search
website
Feminism and Race/Ethnicity
General Resources
Office of the Gender and Women’s Studies Librarian (U. Wisconsin)
Women of Color Web Sites (WMST-L)
African-American/Black Feminisms and Womanism
Feminism and Black Womanist Identity Bibliography
(Univ. of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign Library)
Black Feminist/Womanist Works: A Beginning List
(WMST-L)
Asian-American and Asian Feminisms
American Women’s History: A Research Guide (Asian-American Women)
South Asian Women’s Studies Bibliography
(UC Berkeley)
Journal of South Asia Women’s Studies
Chicana/Latina Feminisms
Chicano/a Latino/a Movimientos
American Indian, Native, Indigenous Feminisms
Native American Studies Program
(Dartmouth College)
Feminism, Sex, Sexuality, Transgender, and Intersex
Sallie Bingham Center for Women’s History and Culture
(Duke Special Collections)
Related Entries
affirmative action
|
communitarianism
|
contractarianism
|
discrimination
|
egalitarianism
|
equality
|
equality: of opportunity
|
exploitation
|
feminist philosophy, approaches: Latin American feminism
|
feminist philosophy, interventions: epistemology and philosophy of science
|
feminist philosophy, interventions: ethics
|
feminist philosophy, interventions: history of philosophy
|
globalization
|
homosexuality
|
identity politics
|
justice: as a virtue
|
justice: distributive
|
legal rights
|
liberalism
|
Mill, Harriet Taylor
|
Mill, John Stuart
|
multiculturalism
|
parenthood and procreation
|
race
Acknowledgments
Over many revisions, thanks go to Ann Garry, Heidi Grasswick,
Elizabeth Harman, Elizabeth Hackett, Serene Khader, Ishani Maitra,
Ásta Sveinsdóttir, Leslee Mahoney, and Anita
Superson.