Global Justice
First published Fri Mar 6, 2015; substantive revision Fri Jun 9, 2023
On common accounts, we have a state of justice when everyone has their
due. The study of justice has been concerned with what we owe one
another, what obligations we might have to treat each other fairly in
a range of domains, including over distributive and recognitional
matters. Contemporary political philosophers had focused their
theorizing about justice almost exclusively within the state, but the
last twenty-five years or so has seen a marked extension to the global
sphere, with a huge expansion in the array of topics covered. While
some, such as matters of just conduct in war, have long been of
concern, others are more recent and arise especially in the context of
contemporary phenomena like intensified globalization, economic
integration, and potentially catastrophic pandemics and anthropogenic
climate change.
John Rawls’s seminal book
The Law of Peoples
initiated
many debates about global justice (Rawls 1999). Several questions soon
became prominent in discussions including: What principles should
guide international action? What responsibilities do we have to the
global poor? Should global inequality be morally troubling? Are there
types of non-liberal people who should be tolerated? What kind of
foreign policy is consistent with liberal values? Is a
“realistic utopia” possible in the global domain? How
might we transition effectively towards a less unjust world?
Contemporary events also played an enormous role in prompting
philosophical inquiries. Prominent cases of genocide, ethnic
cleansing, forms of terrorism uncommon prior to 2001, intensified
interest in immigration to affluent countries, increased dependence on
the labor of those from low-income countries, and enormous threats to
well-being, security and the environment became common catalysts for
further work. Philosophers began to reflect on questions such as: Is
it ever permissible to engage in coercive military action for
humanitarian purposes, such as to halt genocide or prevent large-scale
violations of human rights? Can terrorism ever be justified? Should
affluent countries open their borders more generously than they
currently do to those from low-income countries who would like to
immigrate to them? Are our current global economic arrangements fair
ones and if not, how should they be transformed? What responsibilities
do we have to one another in a globalized, post-Westphalian world
order? How should we allocate responsibilities for reducing global
injustice in our world, such as in the case of distributing costs
associated with addressing climate change?
Increased interest concerning issues of global justice also coincided
with enhanced interest in the place and value of nationalism. These
explorations tracked events such as nationalist clashes which spilled
over into widespread suffering (notably in the former Yugoslavia and
Rwanda), increased calls for national self-determination to carry
considerable weight, such as in state recognition for Palestinians or
Tibetans, and also in the case of secession (prominently, Quebec). In
this area global justice theorists have been concerned with a range of
important questions such as: Under what conditions should claims to
national self-determination be granted substantial weight? When should
self-determination yield to concern for protecting human rights? Are
commitments to nationalism and global justice compatible? Is genuine
democracy only possible at the state level or are there robust forms
of democracy that are possible in more international fora? How are
ideals of democracy best incorporated into defensible global
institutional arrangements? Is world justice possible without a world
state? In recent years reflection on existential threats like climate
change, war, and pandemics and how perspectives of the oppressed might
inform the future of the sub-discipline, have contributed new
dimensions to answering core questions along with adding central
questions within the field.
The primary purpose of this article is to give an orientation to the
enormous and rapidly expanding field of global justice. There are
several entries in this encyclopedia that already cover some of the
core topics well and these will be cross-referenced. But there are
still many important gaps, along with some missing context as to how
some topics fit together. This entry aims primarily to address these
needs.
1. Some Definitional Issues
1.1 Global and International Justice
1.2 What is a Theory of Global Justice?
1.3 When is a Problem a Global Justice Problem?
2. Principles to Guide Behavior in International and Global Matters
2.1 The Influence of Rawls’s
Law of Peoples
2.2 What Global Duties Do We Have?
2.3 Cosmopolitanism, Duties to Non-Compatriots, and Compatriots
2.4 Human Rights Fulfillment
3. The Proper Use of Force, Military Intervention, and its Aftermath
3.1 War and Just Conduct
3.2 Humanitarian Intervention
3.3 Terrorism
4. Global Economic Injustice
5. Global Gender Justice
6. Race and Global Justice
7. Immigration
8. Global Environmental Issues
9. Global Health Issues
10. Some Issues that Cut Across Several Themes
10.1 Natural Resources and Global Justice
10.2 Allocating Responsibilities for Global Problems
10.3 Authority in the Global Domain: Do We Need a World State to Secure Global Justice?
11. The Contribution to Public Policy, Interdisciplinary Engagement, and New Methods
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Some Definitional Issues
1.1 Global and International Justice
A distinction is often drawn between
global
and
international
justice. The key point of difference between
these two notions involves clarifying the entities among which justice
is sought. In international justice the nation or state is taken as
the central entity of concern and justice among nations or states is
the focus. In the domain of global justice, by contrast, theorists do
not seek primarily to define justice between states or nations. Rather
they drill down through the state shell and inquire about what justice
requires among human beings. Global justice inquiries take individual
human beings as of primary concern and seek to give an account of what
fairness among such agents involves. There are several types of
actions that cut across states or involve different agents,
relationships, and structures that might be invisible in an inquiry
seeking justice among states exclusively. Many different kinds of
interactions are not circumscribed by state membership and yet can
importantly affect human beings’ most fundamental interests, so
asking the question about what individual human beings owe one another
often uncovers significant neglected features of relationships and
structures that are of normative concern. Global justice analyses are
not precluded from yielding state-level obligations; indeed, they
typically do. However, they consider a wider array of possible agents
and organizations that might have duties as well.
There are advantages associated with both types of inquiries. An
important advantage of asking what states owe one another is that much
international law presupposes the states system and requires states to
perform various actions to promote justice. In this way,
responsibilities often appear to be clearly allocated to particular
parties thus making it quite precise who ought to do what in our
actual world. One advantage of global justice inquiries is that we are
not forced to take states as a fixed constraint and we can therefore
consider a range of relevant relationships, capacities and roles that
also structure our interactions and might be relevant to how we ought
to conceptualize global responsibilities. While asking about what
individuals owe each other may well have implications for states and
their obligations, a range of other agents and institutions may also
have relevant justice obligations. These responsibilities can become
more visible when we explore what individuals owe each other. The two
approaches have different strengths and can complement each other, but
in contemporary debate they are often taken as rivals competing to
provide the most plausible framework.
For further discussion of international justice, see the entry on
international distributive justice
.
1.2 What is a Theory of Global Justice?
In general, a theory of global justice aims to give us an account of
what justice on a global scale consists in and this often includes
discussion of the following components:
identifying what should count as important problems of global
justice
positing solutions to each identified problem
identifying who might have responsibilities in addressing the
target problem
arguing for positions about what particular agents (or collections
of agents) ought to do in connection with solving each problem
and
providing a normative view which grounds (1)–(4).
Theories of global justice aim to help us understand our world better
and what our responsibilities are in it. While some theorists aim
purely at theoretical understanding, others hope also to provide an
analysis that can be useful in practical policy making concerning
global justice matters.
1.3 When is a Problem a Global Justice Problem?
Problems of global justice arise when one (or more) of the following
conditions obtain:
Actions stemming from an agent, institution, practice, activity
(and so on) that can be traced to one (or more) states negatively
affect residents in another state.
Institutions, practices, policies, activities (and so on) in one
(or more) states could bring about a benefit or reduce harm to those
resident in another state.
There are normative considerations that require agents in one
state to take certain actions with respect to agents or entities in
another. Such actions might be mediated through institutions,
policies, or norms.
We cannot solve a problem that affects residents of one or more
states without co-operation from other states.
So, in general, a problem is one of global justice when the problem
either affects agents resident in more than one state or the problem
is unresolvable without their co-operation. For the problem to be
considered genuinely global rather than regional it should affect more
than one regional area.
2. Principles to Guide Behavior in International and Global Matters
What sorts of duties of justice, if any, exist among human beings who
do not reside in the same country? If there are such duties, what
grounds them? Some argue that John Rawls’s principles developed
for the case of domestic justice, notably, the Fair Equality of
Opportunity Principle or the Difference Principle, should apply
globally (Beitz 1999; Caney 2005a; Moellendorf 2002). Others maintain
that the content of our duties to one another is best explored by
examining alternative concepts not featured in the Rawlsian corpus,
such as capabilities or human rights (Nussbaum 2006; Pogge 2008;
Nussbaum 2015).
Much discussion about what we owe one another in the global context is
influenced by the work of John Rawls, so a short synopsis is needed to
situate debates. Since discussion of these issues is amply covered in
the entries on
international distributive justice
and
John Rawls
,
 this will be a compressed summary focusing only on the most central
aspects of the debate that have a bearing on core topics of global
justice.
2.1 The Influence of Rawls’s
Law of Peoples
In
The Law of Peoples
, John Rawls argues for eight principles
that he believes should regulate international interactions of
peoples. For Rawls, a “people” is constituted by a group
of persons who have in common sufficient characteristics such as
culture, history, tradition, or sentiment. Rawls uses the term
“people” in ways that relevantly correspond with how many
use the term “nation”. In addition, Rawls often assumes
that, for the most part, each people has a state.
The eight principles Rawls endorses acknowledge peoples’
independence and equality, that peoples have the right to
self-determination along with having duties of non-intervention, that
they ought to observe treaties, honor a particular list of human
rights, should conduct themselves in certain appropriate ways if they
engage in warfare, and that they have duties to assist other peoples
in establishing institutions to enable people’s
self-determination. He also advocates for international institutions
governing trade, borrowing, and other international matters that are
characteristically dealt with by the United Nations.
Several claims have been the subject of much debate between critics
and defenders of Rawls’s position. In particular, Rawls believes
that so long as all peoples have a set of institutions that enable
citizens to lead decent lives, any global inequality that might remain
is not morally troubling. Critics draw attention to the ways in which
global inequality – perhaps in levels of power or affluence
– can convert into opportunities for deprivation and
disadvantage. For instance, the global advantaged can use their
superior position to influence the rules that govern international
institutions – such as trade practices – which can
facilitate further opportunities for increased advantage and so they
can indeed threaten the abilities of others in distant lands to lead
decent lives (Pogge
 2008).
[
1
]
Another important issue that underlies debate between Rawls and his
critics concerns different views about the nature and origins of
prosperity. Rawls gives a particularly strong statement of what he
takes the causes of prosperity to be. He claims that the causes of the
wealth of a people can be traced to the domestic political culture,
the virtues and vices of leaders, and the quality of domestic
institutions. He says:
I believe that the causes of the wealth of a people and the forms it
takes lie in their political culture and in the religious,
philosophical, and moral traditions that support the basic structure
of their political and social institutions, as well as in the
industriousness and cooperative talents of its members … The
crucial elements that make the difference are the political culture,
the political virtues and civic society of the country (Rawls 1999,
108).
Critics observe that in addition to local factors, there are also
international ones which play an important role in prospects for
well-being. Thomas Pogge prominently helps bring some of these into
view. The international borrowing and resource privileges, are good
examples of the ways in which international practices can have
profound effects on domestic factors which undeniably also play a role
in promoting prosperity. According to the international borrowing
privilege, governments may borrow amounts of money on behalf of the
country and the country thereby incurs an obligation to repay the
debt. The international resource privilege refers to a
government’s ability to do what it likes with resources,
including selling them to whomever it chooses to and at what price.
Any group that exercises effective power in a state is internationally
recognized as the legitimate government of that territory and enjoys
the two privileges. But, Pogge argues, this sets up undesirable
incentives that hamper developing countries’ abilities to
flourish (Pogge 2008). These include incentivizing those strongly
motivated to hold office for material gain to take power by force or
exercise it in ways that help reinforce oppressive governments’
abilities to retain control. The global advantaged benefit greatly
from these privileges and so have little incentive to reform them.
But, according to Pogge, reforms are sorely needed. If only
sufficiently legitimate governments are able to enjoy these
privileges, the international community would remove one important
obstacle developing countries currently face.
Defenders of Rawls’s views argue that his position is more
complex than is commonly acknowledged and allows for both a principled
stance on some fundamental values along with appropriate openness to
alternative ways in which legitimate and decent peoples might organize
their collective lives (Reidy 2004; Freeman 2006). They argue that
Rawls’s position shows great sensitivity to a number of factors
that must be weighed in considering right conduct in international
affairs. For instance, when Rawls makes his bold claims about the
causes of wealth it is useful to bear in mind the context in which he
is arguing. Against an assumption that resources are enormously
important for a society’s ability to flourish, Rawls emphasizes
the importance of strong institutions, political culture and other
local factors, in sustaining decent lives for citizens. Rawls also
reflects on the difficulty of changing political culture, noting that
simply transferring resources will not help. Interestingly, in a
little discussed passage, Rawls ventures that an “emphasis on
human rights may work to change ineffective regimes and the conduct of
rulers who have been callous about the well-being of their own
people” (Rawls 1999, 109). For more on whether Rawls provides us
with a cogent model that can provide sage guidance in international
matters see the entries on on
international distributive justice
and
John Rawls
.
 See also Martin and Reidy (2006). For the purposes of this entry we
need only summarize some key questions that were influential in
setting the terms of discussion about global justice for some
time.
Some key questions are:
What principles should govern interactions among peoples at the
global level?
What are the causes of prosperity and are they traceable entirely
to domestic factors or are international considerations relevant?
What should count as the kind of prosperity or well-being that we
are aiming to promote?
Do we have an obligation to ensure people have their basic needs
met and can otherwise lead “decent” lives, or should we be
more concerned with global socio-economic equality?
What duties do we have to those peoples who do not yet have what
they need for self-determination or prosperity?
If human rights serve an important role in world affairs, which
rights should be on our list of those to endorse? What duties arise
from such commitment?
Can we properly hold nations to be entirely responsible for the
well-being of their people and if so, in what kinds of conditions
might this make sense? How do we encourage nations to take
responsibility for their people’s well-being?
When we consider what we owe one another, do compatriots deserve
special consideration?
We trace some of the influential positions that have shaped answers to
these questions next.
2.2 What Global Duties Do We Have?
One of the most visible and large-scale contemporary global justice
problems we face is that of global poverty. What ought we to do for
the 1 billion or so people who currently live in poverty? This is a
huge area nicely canvassed in the entry on
international distributive justice
.
 A few seminal arguments deserve mention here as well, however. In a
classic argument Peter Singer describes a so-called easy rescue case
in which an infant is drowning in a shallow pond. You happen by and
can save the child with minimal effort and inconvenience on your part.
Singer argues that you would be obligated to assist using the
principle that when it is in our power to prevent something bad from
happening without sacrificing anything significant or comparable, it
is wrong not to prevent the bad from occurring. So, Singer argues that
we have extensive duties to assist needy others, whether they be
geographically proximate or not. We have extensive duties to assist
the global poor who, with equally minimal effort on our part, can be
saved from dire circumstances, since the same principle applies in
both cases (Singer 1972). (For more treatment see Unger 1996 and for
criticism see Lichtenberg 2013).
Thomas Pogge offers another influential contribution in
World
Poverty and Human Rights
. He argues that since developed
countries impose a coercive global order on the poor that foreseeably
and avoidably causes great harm, they have important responsibilities
to reform the global order such that it ceases to do so and instead
better secures human rights (Pogge 2002, 2008, 2010). We harm the
global poor when we collaborate in imposing an unjust global
institutional order on them and, moreover, that order is unjust when
it foreseeably perpetuates large-scale human rights deficits that can
reasonably be avoided were we to make quite feasible institutional
modifications (Pogge 2002, 2008, 2010). We also harm the poor when we
deprive them of their resources and through a shared and violent
history (Pogge 2008). While Singer emphasizes our capacity to assist
with need satisfaction, Pogge emphasizes instead our contributions to
the problem as grounding our duties.
When discussing our duties to one another there is also vigorous
debate about what the content and target of our duties should be,
along with discussion about what are the best ways to discharge these.
Traditional dominant economic approaches to promoting prosperity have
focused on raising income levels or increasing Gross Domestic Product
(GDP). Railing against such approaches, Amartya Sen suggested that the
capabilities approach provides an improved measure of well-being and
constitutes a better way to capture changes in people’s
condition over time (Sen 1980). Exploring what people are able to do
and be provides a more appropriate standard by which to evaluate
whether their condition has improved rather than focusing exclusively
on their incomes or per capita GDP. Martha Nussbaum develops this
approach and argues for a list of ten capabilities that should be
secured for all people in all places. This universal list can provide
an important tool in persuading governments to make reforms conducive
to their citizens’ flourishing. (See the entry on
the capability approach
for more.) Another important discourse for discussing duties is that
of human rights which is discussed in
Section 2.4
below. Before we continue it is important to mention that there are
many possible ways to understand the content of our duties to one
another. (For more see entries on
egalitarianism
,
equality
,
sufficiency
,
capability theory
,
well-being
,
 and
needs in moral and political philosophy
).
 The issue of our duties to one another is a vast topic and we
continue to discuss it throughout this entry. This section serves only
as an introduction.
2.3 Cosmopolitanism, Duties to Non-Compatriots, and Compatriots
When considering what we owe one another, are compatriots special? Do
we have the same duties to non-compatriots as we have to compatriots
or is there some principled way in which these two sets of duties
ought to differ?
Nationalists argue that we belong to national communities and any
account of our global responsibilities that ignores this omits an
important aspect of how we relate – and ought to relate –
to one another. They argue that nations can provide a valuable
grounding for social attachment, identity and meaning in life, and can
ground special obligations to strengthen national life and assist
co-nationals (Miller 1995; Tamir 1993; Lenard 2012). Others defend the
value of nationalism on instrumental grounds; there is nothing
inherently special about our co-national relationships but state
boundaries are useful in assigning important duties to particular
agents (Goodin 1998). In a world of great unmet need, paying special
attention to one’s co-nationals can be justified (Goodin 1998;
Lenard
 2012).
[
2
]
In the words of Diogenes, widely credited as the first person to
propound cosmopolitan views, cosmopolitans see themselves as
“citizens of the world”. Contemporary cosmopolitans
typically hold that every human being has standing as an ultimate unit
of moral concern and is entitled to equal consideration of her
interests no matter what other affiliations, especially national
affiliations, she might have. Drawing on the idea that we all have
equal moral worth, cosmopolitans seek to broaden our moral horizons so
that we do not forget about the responsibilities we have to others
beyond state borders, even when we have local responsibilities as
well.
Prominent cosmopolitans frequently offer accounts that feature
different elements. Martha Nussbaum emphasizes that, as human beings,
we belong to a global community of human persons (Nussbaum 1996).
Nussbaum argues that while love for one’s country might have a
legitimate place in people’s conceptions of a good life, we
should not overlook the many other relationships we are in which
connect us to others in the world. We need to draw the global
community in closer to the local one, and, more generally, aim to see
ourselves as members of overlapping communities which also have
important claims on us.
By contrast, Thomas Pogge focuses on the implications of
cosmopolitanism for the global institutional order. We need to ensure
that global institutional structures give equal consideration to
everyone’s interests. He says, “Insofar as human agents
are involved in the design or administration of global rules,
practices, or organizations, they ought to disregard their private and
local, including national, commitments and loyalties to give equal
consideration to the needs and interests of every human being on this
planet” (Pogge 2013, 298). This equal-consideration-of-interests
requirement only applies to such contexts. While such impartiality
norms are perfectly familiar within the state, for instance, when
judges operate in law courts, we have yet to realize the requirement
at the global level.
It is often assumed that cosmopolitanism must necessarily be in
tension with more local attachments to friends, family or compatriots.
Some cosmopolitans believe such conflict is inevitable, unproblematic
and a necessary part of understanding what cosmopolitanism entails
(Ypi 2013a). Others argue for different ways in which the apparent
tensions could be resolved (Pogge 2013; Tan 2004; Appiah 2007; Cabrera
2020). As we see above, Pogge emphasizes the clear separation of
spheres in which equal consideration of people’s interests
applies. Kok-Chor Tan offers a similar argument. His strategy is to
show that cosmopolitan principles should govern global institutional
structures that ensure people are treated as equals in their
entitlements (Tan 2004). When this is the case there can be a
legitimate role for patriotism that operates within such constraints.
Partiality to co-nationals need not conflict with cosmopolitan
obligations. Another notable strategy is to argue that we cannot
achieve justice at a national level unless we attend to justice at a
global level. On this view, we have at least instrumental reasons to
care about global justice, even if we care deeply about social justice
in our nation (Banai; Ronzoni and Schemmel 2011; Ronzoni 2013).
There is an important debate among egalitarian theorists about whether
our concern with equality should be confined to members of the same
state or whether it should extend to all globally. Some theorists
argue that careful consideration of notions such as reciprocity,
coercion, or fair terms of co-operation mandate that we give special
weighting to the interests of compatriots (Blake 2013). Others, by
contrast, argue that these concerns, when properly understood, point
in the direction of equally strong duties to non-compatriots. One form
of the argument that we have special duties to compatriots that are
not shared with non-compatriots, draws on the coercive legal structure
that applies within states and claims that such coercive structures do
not apply outside of them (R. Miller 1998; Blake 2001). Another highly
influential version claims that there is a difference in the authority
to enforce justice within and outside the state (Nagel 2005). There
are many important challenges to such positions. One important line of
argument maintains that coercion is indeed relevant in triggering
duties of egalitarian justice, but since this is rampant at the global
level it activates global not just national egalitarian duties (Cohen
and Sabel 2006; Abizadeh 2007; Valentini 2012). So, the same
ingredients Nagel identifies as crucial in generating state authority
exist at the global level as well (Cohen and Sabel 2006). Nicole
Hassoun argues that there are many coercive international institutions
and that, to be legitimate, these institutions must ensure that
everyone they subject to coercive rules can secure what they need to
consent or object to these rules. This requires adequate food, water,
shelter, education, healthcare and the social and emotional support
they require for sufficient autonomy (Hassoun 2012). Laura Valentini
suggests coercion requires freedom as independence (non-domination)
but this does not require egalitarianism in the global sphere. Rather,
a just global order would be inclusive, not oppressive (Tan 2013, 25).
Others provide novel ways of defending cosmopolitan egalitarian
theories or combining them with statist commitments. Pablo Gilabert
articulates a contractualist theory of egalitarian justice that
generates positive obligations to eradicate severe poverty globally
even without robust international institutions or cosmopolitan
solidarity (2012). Similarly, Lea Ypi defends a statist
cosmopolitanism that stresses the importance of political obligations
to support cosmopolitan ends. She suggests a significant degree of
equality is important for helping everyone secure a basic minimum and
cultural resources, a sense of justice, and education can help promote
this equality (Ypi 2012; on education and global justice, in
particular, see Culp 2020a). Ypi sees fostering the commitment to
cosmopolitan ideals as a political, as well as moral, task (Ypi
2013a).
Once again, these are vast topics and more treatment can be found
elsewhere in this encyclopedia, such as the entry on
international distributive justice
.
 For comprehensive treatment of nationalism and cosmopolitanism see
the entries on
nationalism
and
cosmopolitanism
,
 respectively.
2.4 Human Rights Fulfillment
Discussion of global justice matters often invokes concern for human
rights. In fact, for all their differences, both nationalists and
cosmopolitans frequently agree that a good way to think about some of
our duties to one another is via human rights. Human rights can and do
therefore serve as an important discourse for furthering discussion
about our global responsibilities.
Respecting human rights is an important requirement in much
international law and can be a key criterion in evaluating whether
governments are considered legitimate by the international community.
The United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights is a highly
influential account of all human beings’ basic entitlements and
this document often plays an important role in real world debates
about justice matters. See the comprehensive entry on
human rights
for more detail. Here we have space to discuss only two issues that
have been prominent in debates about global justice.
The first concerns the kinds of duties we have in relation to human
rights. Against a conventional view widespread before 1980, Henry Shue
argues that if rights to physical security are basic, so are rights to
subsistence (Shue 1980). A careful analysis of the duties associated
with human rights indicates that the commonly held distinction between
positive and negative duties cannot be maintained. All rights have a
range of both positive and negative duties associated with them.
The second prominent issue concerns whether our failures in relation
to fulfilling human rights amount to rights violations. Thomas Pogge
(2008) offers an influential account of duties with respect to human
rights. Our current global order perpetuates global poverty on a
massive scale, but since feasible reforms to that order could avert
this harm, our failure to make reforms not only implicates us in the
misery but also in the violation of the rights of the
 poor.
[
3
]
We therefore have extensive obligations to reform our global order so
that the rights of the poor can be fulfilled.
Many theorists have done important work on a range of issues
concerning human rights and international obligations (Buchanan 2004;
Hessler 2005; Nickel 2007; Beitz 2009; Holder and Reidy 2013; Song
2019). Theorists have also focused attention on particular rights,
prominently the right to health (Wolff 2013). Some important questions
include: What are human rights’ grounds or can they be defined
by their functions? Are human rights properly moral or
political/legal? Does respect for rights conflict with community
obligations or respect for culture? What is the proper role of human
rights in morality, law, and policy? How should we best understand the
normative implications of our contemporary human rights practice?
(Wolff 2013; Cruft, Liao, and Renzo 2015; Gilabert 2019; Etinson 2018;
O’Neill 2005; Beitz 2009; Brock 2023).
For more treatment of issues, especially concerning what human rights
are, which rights are rightly construed as human rights, and how human
rights function in international law, see the entry on
human rights
.
3. The Proper Use of Force, Military Intervention, and its Aftermath
3.1 War and Just Conduct
Within the field of global justice, issues concerning war have one of
the longest histories. The just war framework has been influential in
setting the terms of much debate about the proper use of force in
international affairs. Aristotle, Cicero, Augustine and Thomas Aquinas
offered some of the earliest accounts of the criteria that should be
met for war to be justified. Two areas have been especially thoroughly
studied: (1) the conditions under which entry into the war is
justified (Jus Ad Bellum) and (2) the conditions for fair conduct
within the war (Jus In Bello). While having a just cause is standardly
held to be a necessary condition for a war to be justified, it is not
sufficient. Theorists often disagree about which additional conditions
must be satisfied for a war to be characterized as a just war. The
most common additional conditions proposed are that the war should be
undertaken by a proper authority, with the right intentions, when the
war would follow requirements of proportionality (the ends to be
secured would warrant going to war), only as a last resort, and when
there are reasonable prospects of success. On traditional accounts of
just war theory all conditions must be met, while several theorists
challenge whether they are all necessary (Mellow 2006; Moellendorf
2002; Walzer 1983).
Once the fighting begins two central principles guide evaluation of
whether the war is being conducted fairly: one which respects the
distinction between combatants and noncombatants (The Principle of
Non-Combatant Immunity) and another that governs what counts as the
proportional use of force (Proportionality). On the first, it is not
legitimate to use force against civilians and, even though some
collateral civilian damage may occur, it is wrong to deliberately
target non-combatants. On the second, combatants may only use the
force necessary to achieve their ends – the force used must be
proportional to the ends that are to be secured in conducting the war.
There are further requirements governing fairness, such as
requirements to comply with international laws and treat prisoners
fairly, but the two featured principles are the most commonly invoked
in normative analyses of
Jus In Bello
.
The third part of just war theory (
Jus Post Bellum
) concerns
how the war concludes and the transition back to a situation of peace
(Bass 2004, Rodin 2008). It deals with issues such as compensation,
punishment, and reform (Ohlin 2014). A fourth component has been
suggested especially in light of engagements in Iraq and Afghanistan
in the years 2001–2011, namely, justice in exiting the war
(
Jus Ex Bello
), which concerns when it is appropriate to end
a war (Moellendorf 2008; Rodin 2008).
There are many contemporary global justice issues concerning the
appropriate use of force (and its aftermath) that currently command
attention including: Is drone warfare (or any kind of warfare)
permissible? Can terrorism ever be justified? Are “targeted
assassinations” (where leaders who are primarily responsible for
decisions to go to war are targeted for assassination) justifiable?
May we engage in a war in order to prevent an anticipated “worse
war”? Is torture to contain major global threats permissible? Is
the attempt to contain nuclear weapons development by those who have
them already fraught with hypocrisy? How should we deal best with
societies in a state of transitional justice? Is there a place for
“Truth and Reconciliation Committees” (Walker 2006)? When
are political apologies for historic injustice in warfare appropriate?
Some suggest that the changing nature of combat has fundamentally
altered the ethics of war, for instance emphasizing how individuals
can be held morally accountable for their participation and actions
contributing to unjust wars (Ryan 1983; McMahan 2009; Pfaffe 2020;
Ohlin 2014; Reitan 2018). Scholars also consider different ways to
engage in defensible non-militaristic international reform
interventions (Rafanelli 2021).
Here we consider very briefly only two further issues that continue to
attract widespread current interest in the global justice literature:
Humanitarian Intervention and Terrorism. See the entry on
terrorism
for an extended analysis of such questions. See the entry on
war
for a comprehensive overview of issues concerning justice in war.
3.2 Humanitarian Intervention
Under what conditions, if any, may we engage in military intervention
aimed at stopping genocide? In recent years this issue has become
salient as large-scale human rights violations and suffering unfolded
in Rwanda, the Sudan, the former Yugoslavia, and Libya. Against the
traditional understanding that respecting state sovereignty requires
non-interference, successful arguments were marshaled that there are
important responsibilities to protect the vulnerable (International
Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty 2001). Leaning
heavily on the conventional conditions contained in the just war
framework, the International Commission on Intervention and State
Sovereignty argued that we may engage in war aimed at protecting those
who suffer at the hands of governments unwilling or unable to stop
large-scale human rights abuses. The commission produced an
influential report “The Responsibility to Protect” which
was accepted by the United Nations in 2005, and the principles
contained in the report have guided decisions about cases, such as
Libya in 2011 and Syria in 2012. One frequently voiced concern about
humanitarian interventions is whether they are just another form of
imperialism. How will interveners be held accountable for their
actions? Taking such concerns seriously Allen Buchanan and Robert
Keohane advocate for a series of innovative mechanisms of
accountability, both before and after the proposed intervention takes
place, to allay fears about abuse (Buchanan and Keohane 2004).
3.3 Terrorism
What kinds of violence count as terrorism? Is there a difference
between state terrorism and that perpetrated by insurgent
organizations? Might terrorism be justified under certain
circumstances? Terrorism centrally involves either using or
threatening to use violence against people, commonly taken to be
innocent, in order to produce results that would not otherwise occur
(Coady and O’Keefe 2002; Primoratz 2013). Some challenge that
the targets are innocent. As terrorists often point out about citizen
complicity in atrocities, citizens pay taxes and vote, and their
governments undertake actions that they can be said to sanction and
from which they benefit, so it is coherent to hold citizens
responsible for their governments’ actions. On this argument,
citizens can be legitimate targets of violence. In addition, there is
relevant precedent from governments targeting civilians when they
perceive the situation to be one of a “supreme emergency”,
as happened in the case of Britain targeting German civilians in the
Second World War. So when governments judge that some moral disaster
is sufficiently likely, it can be repelled using unorthodox and
otherwise repugnant means.
4. Global Economic Injustice
Do global economic arrangements – especially economic
globalization – give rise to important responsibilities?
Globalization is a complex phenomenon, characterized by the faster
movement of people, goods, and ideas across borders but with many
facets. For our purposes we need to note only some of its
characteristic central features. These include (i) an increasingly
globally integrated economy, (ii) dominated by transnational
corporations engaged in activities (such as production and
distribution) that span multiple countries, (iii) increasing
regulation of economic matters by supranational institutions (such as
the World Trade Organization), (iv) general commitment to removal of
barriers to “free trade,” and (v) higher levels of
economic interdependence. While there is much debate about the
long-term effects of globalization and whether they are on balance
good or bad, at this stage, the effects of globalization have been
mixed. For some, globalization has brought improvements, while it has
worsened the position of others (Singer 2002; Hassoun 2008; Risse
2012a; Risse and Wollner 2019).
Philosophers have been concerned with answers to a range of questions
such as: What kinds of economic arrangements are just? Should our
international institutions be reformed to better reflect fair terms of
co-operation in our globalized world? Can globalization be better
managed so that it works to assist the global poor more effectively?
Are protectionist policies in trade justified or, rather, is free
trade required by considerations of justice? Should poor working
conditions in developing countries be a matter of concern for citizens
and consumers in affluent, developed countries? If so, how might
harmful employment conditions be effectively improved?
While Thomas Pogge argues that globalization has harmed the poor on a
massive scale, Mathias Risse argues that this is not at all clear
(Pogge 2010; Risse 2005). Risse argues that in many ways the global
order must be credited with benefiting the global poor as well. He
challenges Pogge’s claim that there are feasible alternatives to
our global order that could be easily implemented and would avert the
harm to which Pogge draws attention.
The World Trade Organization (WTO) has been an important focal point
for discussion about global economic justice. In particular, critics
argue that some of its policies, such as those that generally advocate
free trade but allow protectionism in affluent developed countries,
involve grave hypocrisy and unfairness to some of the world’s
most vulnerable people, while others defend some key WTO provisions
(Risse and Wollner 2019; Pogge 2001; Moellendorf 2002; Hassoun 2009a,
2011; James 2012). For further reading see: de Bres 2016. There are
also large disparities in the resources at the disposal of various
parties such that weaker parties often suffer huge disadvantages in
being able to negotiate agreements that work well for them. In these
sorts of ways agents in developed countries (such as governments,
citizens or firms) can take unfair advantage of those in developing
countries (R. Miller 2010; Barry and Reddy 2008).
More generally, there are concerns related to the extraordinary power
of multinationals and the undue influence they are able to exercise in
negotiating deals favorable to them at the expense of the interests of
the most vulnerable. So-called sweatshops (in which workers typically
labor under harsh and hazardous conditions) are also a frequently
raised example of how western consumers are implicated in far away
suffering, given the high level of dependence in high-income countries
on labor from low-income ones. When we purchase products manufactured
in sweatshops are we guilty of contributing to exploitation and if so,
what ought we to do to mitigate these unfairnesses? Christian Barry
and Sanjay Reddy offer an innovative proposal to incentivize
improvements in labor standards and wage levels in poor developing
countries (Barry and Reddy 2008). This “Just Linkage”
proposal offers some additional desirable opportunities for enhanced
international trade to those who meet higher standards.
In this domain, philosophers have also examined a range of other
issues including obligations to forgive odious debt and whether
micro-finance is to be welcomed as a positive force for the global
poor (Barry, Herman and Tomitova 2007; Khader 2014; Sorell and Cabrera
2015; Hassoun 2019).
Several philosophers have considered individuals’ obligations to
promote economic justice through ethical consumption. There is an
important debate on whether ethical consumption is helpful and
required (Risse 2005; Walton 2014). Some argue that ethical
consumption is only permissible when appropriately democratic (Hussain
2012; Barry and MacDonald 2018). Others argue that ethical consumption
is permissible as long as it promotes positive change (Hassoun 2018;
Berkey 2021; Budolfson 2015).
Other more general concerns about exploitation and economic justice
can be found at the entries on
exploitation
and
normative economics and economic justice
.
 See also the entry on
globalization
.
5. Global Gender Justice
The effects of poverty do not fall equally on men and women, nor on
boys and girls. In general, poverty makes the lives of women and girls
harder than their male counterparts, as cultural expectations often
dictate that women and girls do more care and domestic work or go
without (or much less) when resources are scarce. This can
significantly thwart women and girls’ well-being, as education,
health care, and food are routinely withheld in favor of distribution
to men and boys.
Cultural perceptions of gender roles can often lead to practices
highly damaging to the most fundamental interests of women and girls.
These include “honor killings” (where it is believed
culturally permissible to kill a girl or woman who is perceived to
have brought shame to the family), genital mutilation, infanticide,
forced prostitution, arranged marriage, and legal recognition of
property and inheritance rights that significantly disadvantage women
and girls. Poverty can exacerbate such vulnerabilities so we have
further reasons to address it as a matter of urgency (Jaggar 2009,
2013, 2014). Martha Nussbaum has argued for a list of ten capabilities
that all human persons, no matter what their gender, ought to be
positioned to exercise. She argues that this approach offers a
powerful tool for persuasion in cases where girls and women are denied
these opportunities by local actors in different cultures.
Alison Jaggar prominently argues that various structures create and
recreate transnational gendered vulnerabilities and she illustrates
with practices common in domestic work and the sex industry (Jaggar
2009, 2014). Anca Gheaus has argued that patterns of international
immigration – where women typically provide an international
market for care work – constitute a kind of care drain. This
work is not fully voluntary occurring against a background of unjust
options, and amounts to a major issue for women and their families as
well as countries and global justice more broadly (Gheaus 2013;
Eckenwiler 2009). Others focus on how universal values can inform
feminist approaches and discuss how concrete issues like globalization
affect women (Khader 2014, 2018; Parekh and Wilcox 2018). (For more
see also the entry on
feminist perspectives on globalization
).
Some important policies have influenced international discourse in
combating gender injustice. The Millennium Development Goals (MGDs)
includes as a third goal the promotion of gender equality and the
empowerment of women (for discussion of the MGDs, see: Pogge and
Sengupta 2020). The 1995 Beijing Platform for Action set the stage for
several International Covenants and before that the United Nations
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women afforded some important protection for women’s human
rights. Some theorists are suspicious of human rights language and are
inclined to reject what they perceive as a masculine or neocolonial
discourse that trumpets individual autonomy in a way that fails to
acknowledge, adequately, our fundamental human interdependence and
history of oppression (Jaggar 2020). While there certainly is a place
for discussion of these important themes, others argue that we should
not lose sight of the important victories human rights have also been
able to secure, despite still having a long way to go (United Nations
n.d.). The rhetoric of human rights has enabled substantial gains for
promoting gender equality and protection of women’s fundamental
interests, so it has at least strategic value.
For a good survey of recent work on global gender justice, see Jaggar
2020. For more on solutions to often discussed problems, such as
adaptive preferences, see Khader 2011, 2018. For more see the entries on
feminist perspectives on globalization
and
feminist perspectives on power
.
6. Race and Global Justice
Discussion of how histories of imperialism and racial discrimination
have shaped current patterns of global injustice have become more
prominent in Anglo-American discussions of global justice. In
particular, concerns arise about how colonial histories affect
continued oppression and exploitation of racial minority groups on a
global scale (Mills 1997; Bell 2019; Boxill 2009; Okeja 2019; Buckinx,
Trejo-Mathys, and Waligore 2015a; Lu 2017). Shining a light on how
colonialists often embraced beliefs about racial inferiority and
superiority, theorists argue that white supremacy has played an
important role in structuring ways of thinking about global justice.
Key questions that emerge from such analysis include: Have debates
about global justice been inclined to ignore imperial histories
(especially of racial domination) and if so, how should that be taken
into account now? Are egalitarian cosmopolitan accounts effectively
trying to promote liberal imperialism or can such discourse
effectively combat it? What alternative resources can we find in other
traditions of political thought and practice for theorizing global
justice in insightful ways? While some argue that liberalism and
imperialism are inextricable (Mehta 1999), others are more optimistic
about liberalism’s prospects. Yet others believe that sometimes
imperial-like solutions are necessary to solve especially challenging
problems (Ignatieff 2003). (For a good range of views see Bell
2019).
Reflecting on the philosophical field of global justice, it is notable
that until more recently, race is often absent from some of the most
prominent discussions of global justice. Charles Mills was an
especially important figure in drawing attention to these omissions.
In his view, this means that theoretical debates have largely ignored
or misunderstood “some of the principal sources and sites of
injustice” (2019). These omissions can often be traced to
dominant methods in Anglo-American philosophy in which ideal
theorizing (in a Rawlsian fashion in particular) brackets out certain
issues in a conscious way. But putting to the side issues of (say)
racial domination means we will be blind to core histories and
practices, such as slavery, imperialism, and racism that structure our
contemporary world.
Discussion of race and empire have not been completely ignored by
global justice theorists. For instance, there is an important
literature on historical injustice and reparations (Butt 2008; Tan
2007; Lu 2016; Barry and Goodin 2009), and another on trying to
identify how to describe the wrongs of colonialism (Ypi 2013b; Stilz
2015; Valentini 2015). Margaret Moore draws attention to the ways in
which the dispossession of land and racial domination are particularly
important features in identifying the wrongs of settler colonialism
(2016). And yet, the concerns Mills raises still resonate. What would
global justice theorizing look like if it placed histories and
contemporary practices of racial domination at its core? How can we
better integrate histories of colonialism and racial domination into
our thinking about current problems of global justice?
For some, this means we must reject theoretical frameworks and
vocabularies currently on offer by most political philosophers; others
do not believe wholesale rejection is needed. (For a good review of
positions see Bell 2019). Charles Mills exemplifies the first
approach. For Mills, global justice theorists have failed to take
seriously global white supremacy and its legacy and this is especially
noteworthy given its role in understanding current patterns of global
inequality, poverty and violence (1997, 2019). We need to consider
this history and make race a central site of investigation for global
justice theorizing, which requires rejecting Rawlsian-style ideal
theorizing. It would also involve giving a more prominent role to
issues of corrective justice and seeking compensation for the
wide-scale massive injustices perpetrated through structures of global
white supremacy. Similar views can be found in the work of
Olúfẹ́mi Táíwò who writes:
“Injustice and oppression are global in scale… [b]ecause
Trans-Atlantic slavery and colonialism built the world we live in, and
slavery and colonialism were unjust and oppressive”, reparations
require remaking the “world system”
(Táíwò 2022, 1). On his account, reparations
require, among other things, reconciliation and eliminating
institutional racism (Táíwò 2022, 4).
Another very important literature has emerged concerning the many
alternative understandings of justice that can be found in places
formerly dominated by colonial occupation. Indigenous philosophies
have many important insights to offer (Lauer 2017; Metz 2017; Watene
2022). In particular, scholars often consider the prospects for
indigenous perspectives to promote global environmental justice (Whyte
2014; Watene 2022). Locally embedded frameworks often support, but
also provide new alternatives to, traditional approaches to human
needs, rights, international development and justice issues more
generally (Lauer 2017; Menkiti 2017; Metz 2017).
Ines Valdez (2019) argues we should substitute discourse centered on
obligations and duties with one centered on power, coalition-building
and contestation. Kimberley Hutchings (2019) emphasizes that in
decolonizing our theorizing about global justice, we have to change
the way we see the practice of global justice theorizing. We need to
think of the latter less as a way to arrive at answers to global
justice questions and more as a way to live with others without
subsuming them into a particular world. Rather, opening up the
conversation to sharing different perspectives we embark on a
collaborative approach to experiments in living and being with others.
It is not about finding new answers to what we mean by justice but
rather “about finding new ways of relating to ourselves and to
each other in our pursuit of whatever we may think of as
justice” (2019, 121). Adopting such perspectives may reduce some
noted tensions in being part of a world community and others that are
smaller, drawn along racial, ethnic or other identity lines (Appiah
2007).
For more on these topics see the entries on
colonialism
,
race
,
black reparations
,
reconciliation
,
transitional justice
,
 and
critical philosophy of race
.
7. Immigration
There are many issues debated in the global justice literature
concerning migration, whether temporary, permanent, legally sanctioned
or undocumented. These include: Should states have the right to
control their borders? Even if they have such a right, should states
be more generous in admitting would-be migrants, especially
considering the facts about global disparities in life prospects? When
affluent developed states refuse to open their borders to the
economically disadvantaged, is this equivalent to members of the
aristocracy unjustly protecting their privilege, as was the case in
feudal times? What responsibilities are there to refugees? Can
undocumented immigration be justified under certain contemporary
circumstances? What sorts of criteria may affluent developed countries
use when selecting migrants from the pool of applicants for
citizenship? May they legitimately consider how prospective migrants
would fit in with current citizens, favoring certain religious,
linguistic, or ethnic affiliations to manage compatibility? When
making migrant selection decisions, should they consider the effects
on those who remain in countries of origin and if so, is this fair to
the would-be migrants who would be excluded on grounds of alleged
negative impacts for home country citizens? If states admit migrant
workers, are there moral constraints on how they should be treated?
Would admitting temporary workers without simultaneously allowing them
a pathway to citizenship be unjust? What responsibilities do we have
in relation to human trafficking?
There are several now classic defenses of state’s rights to
control borders. David Miller (Miller 2005, 2007), Michael Walzer
(Walzer 1981) and Christopher Wellman (Wellman and Cole 2011) have
been particularly important. Prominent proponents of the alternative
“Open Borders” position include Joseph Carens (Carens
1987, 2013), Philip Cole (Cole 2000; Wellman and Cole 2011), Chandran
Kukathas (2021) and Alex Sager (2018). While many theorists discuss
the responsibilities to refugees and guest workers, Walzer’s
treatment is particularly influential, especially in arguing for his
view that guest worker programs are only justified when they offer
such “guests” a proper pathway to full and equal
citizenship (Walzer 1981). See also: Owen 2020 and Miller 2020. Within
the global justice literature, there is considerable discussion of the
ethics of recruiting migrants away from poor countries. Whether brain
drain issues should be salient for migration decisions has been a
focal point for some discussion (Carens 2013; Oberman 2013; Brock and
Blake 2015; Bertram 2018). More generally, much recent discussion
concerns justice in state admission policies and the kinds of factors
that may or should be included in deciding who to admit and exclude
(Wellman and Cole 2011; Lister 2010; Oberman, Fine and Ypi 2016; Blake
2019; Sager 2018; Song 2018; Brock 2020; Morgan 2020; Wilcox 2021;
Hidalgo 2021; Buckinx 2019; Jaggar 2020; Vasanthakumar 2022). There
has been considerable discussion of appropriate treatment for refugees
(see especially Serena Parekh 2017, 2020 and Brock 2020). And
discussion has also focused on duties for those who leave their
countries of origin (Vasanthakumar 2022; Brock and Blake 2015). For
more detailed coverage of issues concerning migration matters, see the
entry on
immigration
.
8. Global Environmental Issues
Patterns of human behavior that destroy habitats, accelerate species
extinction, exacerbate toxic levels of pollution, degrade the oceans,
contribute to ozone layer destruction, or increase population levels
are all issues of global environmental concern (Armstrong 2022;
Gardiner 2011; Gardiner, Caney, Jamieson, Shue, and Pachauri 2010).
However, although there are many global environmental topics that are
rightly concerns of global justice, there is one that dominates
discussion and that concerns our responsibilities with respect to
climate change. Here we focus exclusively on this issue.
Among the scientific community it is no longer controversial that
anthropogenic climate change is real and a significant threat to the
well-being of both current and future generations. But it is also
widely acknowledged that human development is an important way to
address high levels of global poverty, that such development is energy
intensive, and the cheapest sources of energy available are not likely
to be clean energy types. These considerations significantly affect
efforts to deal with problems presented by climate change. There is
much discussion about the principles that should inform a fair treaty
aimed at dealing with addressing climate change that also gives
appropriate weight to concerns for human development (Shue 2014;
Athanasiou et al. 2022). Some of the main contenders include
principles that recognize causal responsibility for high emission
levels, principles that are sensitive to ability to pay, and ones
according to which those who have benefited from emissions should now
be expected to absorb more costs.
We have not all contributed equally to the problems created by
emissions; industrialized nations have contributed historically at
much higher levels than those that are still developing. And so we
should endorse the guidelines that those who have polluted more should
pay more to help redress current problems (The Polluter Pays
Principle). However critics argue that this principle unfairly holds
some responsible when they did not know they were causing harm, since
it was not widely known that greenhouse gases could result in climate
change prior to 1990. So on this view, responsibility for emissions
prior to 1990 should not conform with the Polluter Pays Principle,
even if it is used to allocate costs after 1990. Others reply that
countries can still be liable for causing harm even if they lack moral
responsibility for doing so (Shue 2014). A second principle that is
often discussed is The Beneficiary Pays Principle. Those who live in
industrialized countries have typically benefited greatly from high
levels of emissions so it is not unfair if they are expected to pay a
higher proportion of costs. Critics object that a history of
benefiting is an insufficiently strong consideration for assigning
responsibilities now: in many cases whether or not people benefit is
largely outside of their control. According to a third popular
principle, The Ability to Pay Principle, the capacity of agents to pay
for costs associated with mitigating climate change should be
relevant. Again, some object that the ability to pay is a poor
principle for assigning responsibility.
More recently, philosophers have evaluated different proposals for not
only mitigating and distributing the costs of climate change but also
adaptation to its diverse effects (Gosseries 2004; Vanderheiden 2008;
Gardiner, Caney, Jamieson, Shue, and Pachauri 2010; Blomfield 2019;
Shue 2014, 2021; Brooks 2020). Moreover, they have considered how we
can mobilize hope in the face of the seemingly tragic consequences of
our failures to both address the challenges of climate change and
human development in a timely manner (Moellendorf 2022; Cripps 2022;
Malm 2021; Mckinnon 2022). Some of this work connects to important
debates about feasibility and institutional mechanisms for addressing
climate change fairly (Caney 2020; Gheaus 2013; Gilabert and
Lawford-Smith 2012). For more on climate justice see the entries on
climate justice
and
climate science
(Parker 2018; Caney 2022). Comprehensive treatment of climate justice
requires addressing the issue of responsibilities to future
generations (Meyer and Gossieries 2009). For important treatment of
our responsibilities to other generations see the entry on
intergenerational justice
.
9. Global Health Issues
One striking feature of the state of global health is that there are
large inequalities in health outcomes and opportunities for health.
Consider that life expectancy can vary a great deal. A person born in
Sierra Leone can expect to live about 40 years whereas one born in
Japan can expect to live for 80 years. Malaria has been almost
entirely eradicated in high-income countries, but it still kills about
a million people in developing countries per year (United Nations
2009). A woman in Niger has a 1 in 7 chance of dying in childbirth,
whereas this is 1 in 11 000 for women in Canada (Benatar and Brock
2011, 2021). The global burden of disease is by no means evenly spread
nor does workforce capability correspond with areas of highest need.
In fact many of the countries that suffer from the greatest burdens of
disease have the fewest skilled healthcare workers. In addition,
pharmaceutical companies do not spend their research and development
budgets in ways that match where the needs are greatest. Rather,
seeking the most profitable ventures, they are much more likely to
spend resources developing drugs for lucrative markets where the
payoffs are greatest, even when the marginal benefits to consumers are
small. One example is the research and development resources
pharmaceutical companies frequently spend on developing drugs that are
similar to others already available, rather than developing treatments
for diseases for which there are no cures. Historically, it is
estimated that drug companies spent approximately 90% of their
research and development resources in seeking treatment for about 10%
of diseases and some argue that justice requires reorienting
incentives for new research and development to better align with the
global disease burden (Drugs for Neglected Diseases Working Group
2001; Flory and Kitcher 2004).
The poor in developing countries are also often more vulnerable to
disease and less able to resist disease because of poor living
conditions related to poverty. Lack of clean water, clean energy
sources, inadequate nutrition, and other social determinants of health
play a key role in explaining this increased vulnerability. Living in
overcrowded houses can facilitate the spread of infectious diseases,
such as tuberculosis. So, a number of issues that sustain poverty or
exacerbate people’s vulnerability to disease as a result of
poverty should be of concern (Benatar and Brock 2021). As Norman
Daniels argues, health inequalities among different social groups can
be considered unjust when they result from unjust distribution in
factors that are socially controllable that affect population health
(Daniels 2011, 101). On this view many health inequalities that exist
are ones that ought to be of concern as they meet this criterion. How
should responsibilities for improving this situation be allocated? In
many ways, but here we pick out just a few that have received
considerable attention in the philosophical literature.
The current system of intellectual property rights is one troubling
area. The World Trade Organization grants product patents for a twenty
year period which effectively renders many new medicines unaffordable
for the vast majority of the world’s population and those in
greatest need. There are a number of innovative proposals aimed at
addressing these issues. One prominent example is the Health Impact
Fund proposal developed by Thomas Pogge, which offers alternative ways
to reward pharmaceutical companies, notably by how much impact they
have on actually curing diseases (Pogge 2008). The greater their
impact, the larger the share of the rewards they would receive from
the Health Impact Fund. Nicole Hassoun proposes a “Global Health
Impact” certification program for rating pharmaceutical
companies’ contributions to the global poor (Hassoun 2020).
Companies would compete for the gold star rankings which could
significantly affect consumption choices and thereby expected profits.
In both cases the aim is to create important incentives for key agents
to care about how their products affect the global poor.
There are many other issues that concern philosophers in the domain of
global health. There are worrying practices of experimentation on
disadvantaged subjects in developing countries (Emanuel et al. 2004).
Increasingly, clinical research has been outsourced to poor,
developing countries with populations that are often highly
vulnerable. We might wonder about whether these populations are being
exploited and whether the participants have compromised abilities to
consent to drug trials. In many cases the trials bring considerable
health benefits that would not come their way were it not in the
interests of pharmaceutical companies to do clinical research in those
locations. If sufficient benefits accrue for local populations, some
argue that these cases need not be of concern, while others disagree
(Emanuel et al. 2004; London 2011).
New infectious diseases and the threat of pandemics are creating
further questions about our responsibilities. Often the case is made
that national interests in public health in developed countries
mandate concern for infectious diseases that originate in developing
countries. When resources for addressing these threats are limited,
some argue it is acceptable for states to prioritize their
populations, while others disagree (Hassoun 2021; Ferguson and Caplan
2021; Savulescu 2020). There are also important debates about how to
distribute vaccines across borders and about whether other public
health policies – e.g. immunity passports – violate
individual rights or are justified for protecting public health
(Emanuel et al. 2020; Emanuel et al. 2021; Herlitz et al. 2021; Liu,
Salwi, and Drolet 2020; Persad and Emanuel 2020; Voigt 2022; Jecker
2022; Bramble 2020; Baylis and Kofler 2020a, 2020b; Jecker, Wightman,
and Diekema, forthcoming). Some argue that global justice –
solidarity and respect for human rights – demands addressing
diseases that are not as transmissible as COVID-19 and may not pose as
significant threats to many people in developed countries (Daniels
2007; Atuire and Hassoun 2023; Gould 2018; Lenard and Straehle 2012;
Benatar and Brock 2021; Herlitz et al. 2021). There is also
significant concern for fair procedures in addressing health crises
globally.
For more see also
public health ethics
,
 and
justice, inequality, and health
.
10. Some Issues that Cut Across Several Themes
10.1 Natural Resources and Global Justice
Discussion of natural resources often figures prominently in several
topics of global justice. Some relevant questions include: Are
national communities entitled to the resources they find on their
territories? Should principles of global justice apply to our
arrangements for justly distributing natural resources? Charles Beitz
was an early proponent of a resource distribution principle, according
to which natural resources should be allocated such that each society
is able to provide adequately for its population (Beitz 1975). We saw
in
Section 2
that Rawls believes that resources are not important to prosperity in
the ways many imagine. Rather, institutional resilience matters more.
By contrast, Thomas Pogge highlights the ways in which international
practices concerning the distribution of resources create considerable
obstacles for prosperity in developing countries. In short, these
practices create incentives for the wrong kinds of people to take
power through illegitimate means and to focus on retaining power at
the expense of other goals governments should have, such as trying to
improve the well-being of their citizens. We need to modify these
international practices so they do not create such an unfavorable
environment. In addition, Pogge proposes a Global Resources Dividend
as one measure by which practices concerning natural resource
distribution would work in some small way to the benefit of the global
poor. On this Global Resources Dividend proposal there would be a
small tax on resource extraction, payable by the consumers of
resources, and available for projects that would assist in helping
everyone to be able to meet their basic needs with dignity (Pogge
2008).
Leif Wenar is also concerned with prevailing practices governing the
sale of natural resources and their products (Wenar 2010, 2016). When
consumers in wealthy states buy goods from developing countries, this
is often similar to consciously receiving stolen goods. Legitimate
resource sales require general agreement from citizens. Evidence of
agreement requires that: (i) owners must be informed about sales, (ii)
owners must be able to express dissent freely should they have doubts
about sales, and (iii) owners should be able to stop resource sales
without fearing grave consequences such as violence and intimidation.
Wenar aims to outlaw dispossession of citizens’ resources by
promoting various practices that would satisfy these conditions and
promote clean trade (Wenar 2016).
For various reasons (including strategic ones) Thomas Pogge and Leif
Wenar do not directly challenge the right of nations to own resources
on their territories. Policy recommendations, are much more likely to
be effective if they can fit within the main structures of
international conventions. However, other theorists do take up this
issue including Hillel Steiner (2005), Tim Hayward (2005) and Mathias
Risse (2005, 2012b). Steiner argues that all inhabitants of the world
are entitled to an equal share in the value of all land and he
advocates for the “Global Fund” which aims to ensure that
equal share entitlements can be secured. The Global Fund would
constitute a clearing house for payments and disbursements (Steiner
2005).
Appealing to accounts of ownership of resources, some philosophers
draw out important implications for diverse global justice debates.
Mathias Risse argues that we all, collectively, own the resources of
the earth and this has profound implications for a range of global
justice issues, including immigration. When people are under-utilizing
their “rightful shares” of territory, they cannot complain
when co-owners would like to occupy some of it. Some theorists
concerned with environmental issues also discuss our rights with
respect to natural resources. Some argue that we have equal rights to
access the earth’s resources. Tim Hayward, for instance, argues
that we have equal rights to ecological space (Hayward 2005). This is
often appealed to when there is a perception that we have exceeded our
share, such as in levels of carbon emissions and consumption more
generally.
Accounts according to which we have equal rights to resources, land,
ecological space and so on, are often accused of suffering from an
important common problem. It is difficult to defend a clear and
compelling account of the value of resources as these can vary
considerably in different social, cultural and technological contexts.
But we need to be able to quantify resource values to some plausible
extent, if we are to determine whether people are enjoying or
exceeding their equal shares (Armstrong 2017).
Others defend territorial sovereignty for other reasons. Some, like
Cara Nine argue that collectives have a right to territory when they
“establish legitimate, minimal conditions for justice within a
geographical region” (Nine 2012, 2022). While Anna Stilz argues
that states allow people to associate in specific geographical
locations and realize economic, social, and cultural values free from
interference as long as they respect others’ rights to associate
as well (Stilz 2019). She defends collective self-determination that
represents subjects’ political will and ensures self-directed
agency and non-alienation where this is compatible with global
justice. Stilz maintains that actual states only have a legitimate
right to territory if they have rightful occupancy, implement a system
of basic justice, and represent the shared will of most inhabitants.
But, even when they do not, she thinks states can be justified in
ruling a territory if they are the only available way of providing
decent rule or changing their boundaries will jeopardize urgent
interests or come with high costs (Stilz 2019).
Others argue against territorial sovereignty or for reconceiving
sovereignty in a way that encourages respect for human rights and can
limit our tendency towards war, coercion, inequality and collective
action problems (Chatterjee 2011; Held 1995). Some maintain that all
who are affected by states’ actions should have a say in their
rules while others reject this conclusion. For discussion, see
Buchanan and Keohane 2011. For other important work on territory, see
the entry on
territorial rights and territorial justice
.
10.2 Allocating Responsibilities for Global Problems
There are a number of global justice problems that need to be
addressed, and this raises the issue of how to allocate
responsibilities fairly. Who should do what to reduce global
injustices? Several different agents, groups, organizations and
institutions could play a role. Which responsibilities should devolve
to corporations, governments, consumers, citizens, international
organizations or social movements? Some frequently discussed proposals
focus on agents’ contributions to a problem, their patterns of
benefit from the problem, and their capacity to take constructive
action now. Two influential frameworks deserve more extended
treatment, notably that of Iris Marion Young concerning a social
connection model for allocating responsibilities for structural
injustice and that of David Miller concerning remedial responsibility
(Young 2011; Miller 2007).
In contrast to the idea of responsibility as involving finding fault
and individual liability, Iris Marion Young develops a forward-looking
model which she argues is more appropriate. She draws on the idea that
participation via institutions sometimes produces injustice, so we
have particular responsibilities to address injustice. We share
responsibility for addressing injustice but we may have different
degrees and kinds of responsibility. She offers different parameters
of reasoning that can help individuals and organizations decide what
might make the most sense for them to do in efforts to remedy
injustice, given that there are so many injustices, whereas time and
resources are limited. Using the case study of the global apparel
industry she illustrates how the fact that we are positioned
differently can entail varying but important responsibilities for all
who participate in activities that sustain sweatshops. There are at
least four parameters that agents can use in their reasoning:
Power: we have different levels of influence and capacities to
change processes. We should focus on those areas where we have greater
capacities to change worrisome structural processes. This might mean
focusing on a few key players who have both greater capacity to make
changes themselves and to influence others.
Privilege: some people have more privilege than others in relation
to structures. So middle-class clothing consumers have more
discretionary income, choice and ability to absorb costs – they
can change their clothing purchasing practices more easily than those
who earn minimum wage, have little discretionary income, and little
ability to absorb further costs.
Interest: All who have an interest in changing oppressive
structures have responsibilities in connection with remedying these.
This entails that “victims” too have important
responsibilities since they have a great interest in eliminating
oppression. In a nuanced analysis she argues that they might have
responsibilities in certain contexts, such as to speak out about the
harsh conditions in which they work. They must take some
responsibility for resisting and challenging the structures. Without
their participation the need for reforms may be rationalized away or
reforms may not take the required form. These obligations may not
always exist, especially when the costs of resistance would require
extraordinary sacrifices.
Collective ability: In some cases we already have collective
organization capacities and resources that are well established.
Sometimes it just makes good practical sense to draw on these. So, for
instance, sometimes student associations, faith-based organizations,
unions, or stockholder groups already exercise significant power in
being able to coordinate like-minded members who are willing to take
certain actions. She encourages us to harness organizational resources
where doing so would prove effective.
In summary, Young encourages us to think about how we can best take
responsibility for reducing structural injustice by reflecting on
these four parameters – different positions of power, privilege,
interest and collective ability. (For comprehensive review of the
merits of Young’s approach see McKeown 2018, 2021.)
David Miller offers a tremendously influential connection theory of
responsibility that also discusses our remedial responsibilities.
There are six ways in which we can be connected to someone, P, who
needs help and so be held remedially responsible for assisting. These
connections give rise to six ways in which remedial responsibility can
be identified. We might be morally responsible for P’s
condition; we might be outcome or causally responsible for P’s
condition; we might have had no causal role in their condition but
have benefited from it; we might have capacity to assist P; or we
might be connected to P through ties of
 community.
[
4
]
There is a huge literature on taking responsibility for remedying or
preventing future global injustice, including discussing the merits of
these two dominant approaches. For some other innovative contributions
see, for instance, Barry and Overland 2016, Dahan, Lerner and
Milman-Sivan 2023, 2016, McKeown 2018, 2021, Brock 2023.
More recently attention has focused on what those on the receiving end
of injustice may permissibly do. Alejandra Mancilla (2016) argues that
the needy can take what they need and use material resources for self
preservation even if that requires taking from others. In doing so she
expands on James Sterba’s earlier arguments against libertarians
for similar conclusions (Sterba 2008, 1996). Also see (Cabrera 2004).
Others like Cecil Fabre, Johan Olsthoorn, and Kasper Lippert-Rasmussen
argue that sometimes poor states may wage war on the affluent for
subsistence (Lipper-Rasmussen 2013; Fabre 2016; Olsthoorn 2021).
[Some, like Peter Unger and Gerhart Øverland argue that it is
acceptable to force others to assist in poverty-alleviation under at
least some circumstances (Unger 1996; Øverland 2009)].
In the global justice literature, there are also important concerns
about the distribution of responsibilities among collective and
individual agents. Prominently, can we hold nations responsible for
global injustices or remedying such injustices? This raises important
questions about collective responsibility that are well treated
elsewhere in this encyclopedia (see the entry on
collective responsibility
).
10.3 Authority in the Global Domain: Do We Need a World State to Secure Global Justice?
Is it possible to have global justice in the absence of a world state?
Hobbes argues that this is not possible since there is no global
authority that can secure and enforce the requirements of justice. He
presents the classic so-called realist case, which is highly
influential in international politics, such that there is a state of
nature in the international realm. All states compete in pursuing
their own advantage and since there is no global authority there can
be no justice in international affairs. Also for an overview of some
key work on realism in political philosophy, see the entry on
political realism in international relations
and Rossi and Sleat 2014.
Others are more optimistic. Since we already have a high level of
interaction among states, organizations and other agents, this has
generated various norms and expectations about appropriate conduct
that guides behavior in the international sphere (Beitz 1999).
Moreover, we have a strong interest in co-operation when this is
necessary to deal practically with a range of problems that have
global reach. Global governance is concerned with how we manage
interests affecting the residents of more than one state in the
absence of a world state. There is already a high level of
co-operation among a variety of networks, organizations and other
groups of interested parties at the sub-state level, and this is
powerfully influencing the redesign of best practice norms in
particular domains (Slaughter 2004). Some argue for a global state or
democratic system – often with subsidiarity or some kind of
poly-centric political order, and others argue for more limited forms
of legitimate global governance (Cabrera 2018; Gould 2004, 2014; Held
2004; Kuper 2004; Buchanan and Keohane 2006).
Other change agents that can and have exercised considerable reform
pressures include global social movements, such as the anti-sweatshop
movement, the fair trade movement, and other ethical consumption
movements. Global activism has been an important source of incremental
change. These simple examples show that much more is possible in the
absence of a world state than realists acknowledge.
For more on issues of world government, see the entry on
world government
,
 which provides extended treatment of this issue.
11. The Contribution to Public Policy, Interdisciplinary Engagement, and New Methods
Philosophers are contributing in important ways to discussions of
global justice policy issues. As illustrations, in this entry we have
canvassed several institutional reform proposals for addressing global
injustices which have enjoyed widespread attention, both within the
academy and beyond. These include Thomas Pogge’s Health Impact
Fund and Nicole Hassoun’s Global Health Impact proposals
 (
Section 9
)
 along with Pogge’s proposal for a Global Resources Dividend
 (
Section 10.1
),
 Christian Barry and Sanjay Reddy’s Just Linkage Proposal to
help improve working conditions
 (
Section 4
),
 Allan Buchanan and Robert Keohane’s institutional innovations
to secure accountability in the use of military force
 (
Section 3.2
),
 and the innovative work of Leif Wenar concerning proposals for clean
trade
 (
Section 10.1
).
In addition to those illustrations already highlighted in this
article, philosophers are having an impact on policy discussions in a
wide range of areas including climate change and contributing ideas to
the Human Development Reports (United Nations Development Programme
2020, United Nations Development Programme 2022). They have
contributed to influential international multi-disciplinary projects
that seek alternative ways to measure quality of health, life or
poverty (Nussbaum and Sen 1993, Esposito and Hassoun 2017, Wisor et
al. 2014). Philosophers have also discussed rampant abusive tax
practices by corporations and wealthy individuals and how this
deprives developing countries of much-needed income for human
development in developing countries (Brock 2009). There are also
important discussions of global income taxes, carbon taxes, financial
transaction taxes and Tobin Taxes (Moellendorf 2009; Caney 2005b;
Brock 2009). The pervasive problems associated with corruption have
been attracting increased attention (Wenar 2016; Brock 2023). So,
philosophers continue to make an important contribution to policy
debates and this is also likely to be an area in which important
future work on global justice will concentrate.
Philosophers are also engaging in more interdisciplinary research and
global justice theorists sometimes do experimental or more broadly
empirical philosophy (Miller 2001; Appiah 2007; Hassoun 2009b, 2014;
Lindauer 2020; Lindauer et al. 2023; Buckland et al. 2022;
Pölzler and Hannikainen 2022). Furthermore, there is some
sophisticated work in related disciplines and there is significant
room for fruitful interdisciplinary future research (Cappelen, Fest,
Sørensen and Tungodden 2020).
Philosophers also play central roles in methodological innovation,
which can in turn play an important role in informing debates about
theory and public policy. As one prominent example of the
contributions of new global justice methodologies, it is worth noting
the emergence of “Engaged Theorizing” (see website listed
under internet resources), especially in the global justice context
(Ackerly 2018; Deveaux 2015, 2021; Cabrera 2010; Lu 2017; Rafanelli
2021; Reed-Sandoval 2020). Such approaches take lived experience,
social action campaigns, and justice movements as the central
important starting point for normative theorizing. Using interpretive,
qualitative, and normative analysis, engaged political theorists try
to align political philosophy with the questions, goals, and needs of
communities seeking social justice. In these ways there have been
important new attempts to bring philosophy to bear on our contemporary
global realities, with significant progress made in bridging the
divisions between theory and practice.
Bibliography
Abizadeh, A., 2007, “Cooperation, Pervasive Impact, and
Coercion: On the Scope (not site) of Distributive Justice,”
Philosophy & Public Affairs
, 35(4): 318–358.
–––, 2010, “Citizenship, Immigration and
Boundaries,” in Ethics and World Politics, Duncan Bell (ed.),
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 358–376.
Ackerly, B., 2018,
Just Responsibility
: A Human Rights
Theory of Global Justice, Oxford University Press.
Altman, A. and C.H. Wellman, 2009,
A Liberal Theory of
International Justice
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Anderson, E.S., 1999, “What is the Point of Equality?”
Ethics
, 109(2): 287–337.
Appiah, K.A., 2007,
Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of
Strangers (Issues of Our Time)
, New York: W. W. Norton &
Company.
–––, 2007,
The Ethics of Identity
,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Aquinas, T. “
Summa Theologiae
IIaIIae 40: On
war,” in
Aquinas: Political Writings
, (Cambridge Texts
in the History of Political Thought), R.W. Dyson (ed.), Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2002, pp. 239–247.
Armstrong, C., 2017,
Climate Change and Justice
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 2019,
Why Global Justice Matters: Moral
Progress in a Divided World
, Cambridge: Polity Press.
–––, 2022,
A Blue New Deal: Why We Need a
New Politics for the Ocean
, New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Athanasiou, T., C. Holz, and S. Kartha, 2022, “Fair Shares
– Lessons from Practice, Thoughts on Strategy,” Climate
Equity Reference Project.
 [
Athanasiou et al. 2022 available online
].
Atuire, C., and N. Hassoun, 2023, “Rethinking Solidarity
towards Equity in Global Health: African Views,”
International Journal for Equity in Health
, 22(1): 52.
Banai, A. M. Ronzoni and C. Schemmel (eds.), 2011,
Social
Justice, Global Dynamics: Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives
,
Abingdon: Routledge.
Barry, B. and R. Goodin (eds.), 1992,
Free Movement: Ethical
Issues in the Transnational Migration of People and Money
,
University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press.
Barry, C., B. Herman and L. Tomitova (eds.), 2007,
Dealing
Fairly with Developing Country Debt
, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Barry, C. and T. Pogge (eds.), 2005,
Global Institutions and
Responsibilities: Achieving Global Justice,
Malden, MA.:
Blackwell.
Barry, C. and S. Reddy, 2008,
International Trade and Labor
Standards
, New York: Columbia University Press.
Barry, C. and G. Overland, 2016,
Responding to Global Poverty:
Harm, Responsibility, and Agency
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Barry, C. and K. MacDonald, 2018, “Ethical Consumerism: A
Defense of Market Vigilantism,”
Philosophy and Public
Affairs
, 46(3): 293–322.
Bass, G.J., 2004, “Jus Post Bellum,”
Philosophy
& Public Affairs
, 32(4): 384–412.
Baylis, F., and N. Kofler, 2020a, “A Public Health Ethic
Should Inform Policies On COVID-19 Immunity Passports,”
The
Lancet Infectious Diseases
, 21(4): 456.
–––, 2020b, “Ten Reasons Why Immunity
Passports Are a Bad Idea,”
Nature
, 581(7809):
379–381.
Beitz, C., 1975, “Justice and International
Relations,”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 4(4):
360–389.
–––, 1999,
Political Theory and
International Relations
, Princeton: Princeton University Press,
2nd edition.
–––, 2009,
The Idea of Human Rights
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Beitz, C. and R. Goodin, 2009,
Global Basic Rights
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bell, D., 2010,
Ethics and World Politics
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
–––, (ed.), 2019,
Empire, Race and Global
Justice
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Benatar, S. and G. Brock, (ed.), 2011,
Global Health and
Global Health Ethics
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Benatar, S. and G. Brock, (ed.), 2021,
Global Health: Ethical
Challenges
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Berkey, B., 2021, “Ethical Consumerism, Democratic Values,
and Justice,”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 49(3):
237–274.
Bertram, C., 2018,
Do States Have the Right to Exclude
Immigrants? (Political Theory Today)
, Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Blake, M., 2001, “Distributive Justice, State Coercion, and
Autonomy,”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 30(3):
257–296.
–––, 2013,
Justice and Foreign Policy
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2019,
Justice, Migration, and
Mercy
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Blake, M. and P.T. Smith, 2013, “International Distributive
Justice,”
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2013 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2013/entries/international-justice/>.
Blomfield, M., 2019,
Global Justice, Natural Resources and
Climate Change
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2021, “Land as a Global
Commons?”
Journal of Applied Philosophy
.
doi:10.1111/japp.12550
Bohman, J., 2007,
Democracy Across Borders: From Demos to
Demoi
, Cambridge: MIT Press, 2007.
Boxill, B.R., 2009,
Global Equality of Opportunity and
National Integrity, Cambridge
: Cambridge University Press.
Bramble, B., 2020,
Pandemic Ethics: 8 Big Questions of
COVID-19
, Wilmington: Bartleby Books.
Brock, G., 2006, “Humanitarian Intervention: Closing the Gap
Between Theory and Practice,”
Journal of Applied
Philosophy
, 23(3): 277–291.
–––, 2009,
Global Justice: A Cosmopolitan
Account
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2010, “Recent Work on Rawls’s
Law of Peoples
: Critics versus Defenders,”
American
Philosophical Quarterly
, 47(1): 85–101.
–––, (ed.), 2013, Cosmopolitanism versus
Non-Cosmopolitanism: Critiques, Defenses, Reconceptualization, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
–––, 2020,
Justice for People on the Move:
Migration in Challenging Times
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
–––, 2023,
Corruption and Global
Justice
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Brock, G. and M. Blake, 2015,
Debating Brain Drain: May
Governments Restrict Emigration?,
Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Brock, G. and H. Brighouse (eds.), 2005,
The Political
Philosophy of Cosmopolitanism
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Brock, G. and D. Moellendorf (eds.), 2005,
Current Debates in
Global Justice
, Dordrecht: Springer.
Brooks, T. (ed.), 2008,
The Global Justice Reader
,
Malden, MA: Blackwell.
–––, (ed.), 2020,
The Oxford Handbook of
Global Justice
, Oxford Handbooks, Oxford: Oxford Academics.
–––, 2020, Climate Change Ethics for an
Endangered World, New York: Routledge.
Brown, G. and D. Held (eds.), 2010,
The Cosmopolitan
Reader
, Cambridge: Polity.
Buchanan, A., 1997, “Theories of Secession,”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 26(1): 31–61.
–––, 2004,
Justice, Legitimacy and
Self-Determination
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Buchanan, A. and R. Keohane, 2004, “The Preventive Use of
Force: A Cosmopolitan Institutional Proposal,”
Ethics and
International Affairs
, 18(1): 1–22.
–––, 2006, “The Legitimacy of Global
Governance Institutions,”
Ethics and International
Affairs
, 20(4): 405–437.
Buckland, L., et al., 2022, “Testing the Motivational
Strength of Positive and Negative Duty Arguments Regarding Global
Poverty,”
Review of Philosophy and Psychology
, 13:
699–717.
Buckinx, B., J. Trejo-Mathys, and T. Waligore, 2015a,
Domination and Global Political Justice: Conceptual Historical and
Institutional Perspectives
, New York: Routledge
–––, 2015b,
Domination Across Borders
,
New York: Routledge.
–––, 2019, “Foreign Policy and Domination:
Licensing the State,” in
The State and Cosmopolitan
Responsibilities
, Beardsworth, R., Brown, G. W., and R Shapcott
(eds), Oxford: Oxford Academic.
Budolfson, M., 2015, “Consumer Ethics, Harm Footprints, and
the Empirical Dimensions of Food Choices,” in Philosophy Comes
to Dinner, M.C. Haltema, T. Cuneo, and A. Chignell (eds.), New York:
Routledge.
Butt, D., 2008,
Rectifying International Injustice: Principles
of Compensation and Restitution Between Nations
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Caney, S., 2005a, “Cosmopolitan Justice, Responsibility, and
Global Climate Change,”
Leiden Journal of International
Law
, 18(4): 747–775.
–––, 2005b,
Justice Beyond Borders
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2008, “Global Distributive Justice
and the State,”
Political Studies
, 57(3):
487–518.
–––, 2020, “Climate Justice,” The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2021 Edition), Edward N.
Zalta (ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/justice-climate/>.
–––, 2022, “Global Climate Governance,
Short-Termism, and the Vulnerability of Future Generations,”
Ethics & International Affairs
, 36(2):
137–155.
Cabrera L., 2004, Political Theory of Global Justice: A
Cosmopolitan Case for the World State, New York: Routledge. Cappelen,
A., Fest, S., Sørensen, E., and Tungodden, B., 2020,
“Choice and Personal Responsibility: What Is a Morally Relevant
Choice?,”
The Review of Economics and Statistics
, 104:
1–35.
Cabrera, L., 2010,
The Practice of Global Citizenship
.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, (ed.), 2018.
Institutional
Cosmopolitanism
. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2020,
The Humble Cosmopolitan: Rights,
Diversity and Trans-State Democracy
, Oxford. Oxford University
Press.
Carens, J., 1987, “Aliens and Citizens: The Case for Open
Borders,”
The Review of Politics
, 49(2):
251–273.
–––, 2013,
The Ethics of Immigration
,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Chatterjee, D. (ed.), 2004,
The Ethics of Assistance: Morality
and the Distant Needy
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
––– (ed)., 2011,
The Encyclopedia of Global
Justice
, Dordrecht: Springer.
Chatterjee, D. and D. Scheid, 2003,
Ethics and Foreign
Intervention
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Coady, T. and M. O’Keefe (eds.) 2002,
Terrorism and
Justice: Moral Argument in a Threatened World
, Melbourne:
Melbourne University Press.
Cohen, J., 2010, “Philosophy, Social Science, Global
Poverty,”
Thomas Pogge and His Critics
, A. Jaggar
(ed.), Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 18–45.
Cohen, J. and C. Sabel, 2006, “Extra Republicam Nulla
Justitia?”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
34:
147–175.
Cole, P., 2000,
Philosophies of Exclusion: Liberal Political
Theory and Immigration
, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.
Cripps, E., 2022,
What Climate Justice Means and Why We Should
Care
, New York: Bloomsbury Publishing.
Cruft, R., S.M. Liao, and M. Renzo (eds.), 2015,
Philosophical
Foundations of Human Rights
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Culp, J., 2014,
Global Justice and Development
, London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
–––, 2020a, “Educational Justice,”
Philosophy Compass
15: 1–12.
–––, 2020b, “Special Issue on Global
Justice and Education,”
Global Justice: Theory Practice
Rhetoric
, 12(1): i–ii.
Dahan, Y., H. Lerner, and F. Milman-Sivan, 2016,
Global
Justice and International Labour Rights, Cambridge
: Cambridge
University Press.
–––, 2023, “Shared Responsibility and
Labor Rights in Global Supply Chains,”
Journal of Business
Ethics
, 182(4): 1025–1040.
Daniels, N., 2007,
Just Health: Meeting Health Needs
Fairly
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 2011, “International Health
Inequalities and Global Justice: Towards a Middle Ground” in
Global Health and Global Health Ethics
, S. Benatar and G.
Brock (eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
97–107.
de Bres, H., 2016, “Justice and International Trade,”
Philosophy Compass
, 11(10): 570–579.
Deveaux, M., 2015, “The Global Poor as Agents of
Justice,”
Journal of Moral Philosophy
, 12(2):
125–150.
–––, 2021,
Poverty, Solidarity and Poor-Led
Social Movements
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dobson, A., 1998,
Justice and the Environment
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Doyle, M., 2008,
Striking First: Pre-emption and Prevention in
Interventional Conflict
, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Drugs for Neglected Diseases Working Group, 2001, “Fatal
Imbalance: The Crisis in Research and Development for Drugs for
Neglected Diseases”. Geneva: Médecins Sans
Frontières.
Dryzek, J., 2006,
Deliberative Global Politics: Discourse and
Democracy in a Divided World
, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Eckenwiler, L.A., 2009, “Care Worker Migration and
Transnational Justice,”
Public Health Ethics
, 2(2):
171–183.
Emanuel, E., et al., 2004, “What Makes Clinical Research in
Developing Countries Ethical? The Benchmarks of Ethical
Research,”
The Journal of Infectious Diseases
, 189:
930–937.
–––, 2020, “An Ethical Framework for
Global Vaccine Allocation,”
Science
, 369(6509):
1309–1312.
–––, 2021, “On the Ethics of Vaccine
Nationalism: The Case of Fair Priority for Residents Framework,”
Ethics & International Affairs
, 35(4):
543–562.
Esposito, L. and N. Hassoun, 2017, “Measuring health burden
without discriminating against the disabled,”
Journal of
Public Health
, 39(3): 633–639.
Etinson, A., 2018,
Human Rights: Moral or Political
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fabre, C., 2016,
Cosmopolitan Peace
, Oxford University
Press.
Ferguson, K., and A. Caplan, 2021, “Love Thy Neighbor?
Allocating vaccines in a world of competing obligations,”
Journal of Medical Ethics
, 47: 1–4.
Flory, J.H., and P. Kitcher, 2004, “Global Health and the
Scientific Research Agenda,”
Philosophy & Public
Affairs
, 32(1): 36–65.
Fleurbaey, M., 2008,
Fairness, Responsibility, and
Welfare
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Freeman, S., 2006, “The Law of Peoples, Social Cooperation,
Human Rights and Distributive Justice,”
Social Philosophy
and Policy
, 23(1): 29–68.
Gardiner, S., 2011,
A Perfect Moral Storm: The Ethical Tragedy
of Climate Change
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gardiner, S., S. Caney, D. Jamieson, H. Shue, and R.K. Pachauri
(eds.), 2010,
Climate Ethics: Essential Readings
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Gehring, V. (ed.), 2003,
War after September 11
, Lanham,
MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Gheaus, A., 2013, “Care Drain: Who Should Provide for the
Children Left Behind?”
Critical Review of International
Social and Political Philosophy
, 16(1): 1–23.
–––, 2013, “The Feasibility Constraint on
The Concept of Justice”,
The Philosophical Quarterly
,
63(252): 445–464.
Gilabert, P., 2012,
From Global Poverty to Global Equality: A
Philosophical Exploration
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2019,
Human Dignity and Human
Rights
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gilabert, P., and Lawford-Smith, H., 2012, Political Feasibility:
A Conceptual Exploration.
Political Studies
, 60(4),
809–825.
Goodin, R., 1988, “What Is So Special About Our Fellow
Countrymen?”
Ethics
, 98(4): 663–686.
Gosseries, A., 2004, “Historical Emissions and
Free-Riding,”
Ethical Perspectives
, 11(1):
36–60.
Gould, C., 2004,
Globalizing Democracy and Human Rights
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 2014,
Interactive Democracy: The Social
Roots of Global Justice
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
–––, 2018, “Solidarity and the Problem of
Structural Injustice in Healthcare,”
Bioethics
, 9(32):
541–552.
Hassoun, N., 2008, “Free Trade, Poverty, and the
Environment,”
Public Affairs Quarterly
, 22(4):
353–380.
–––, 2009a, “Free Trade and the
Environment,”
Environmental Ethics
, 31(1):
51–66.
–––, 2009b, “Meeting Needs,”
Utilitas
, 2(3): 250–275.
–––, 2011, “Free Trade, Poverty, and
Inequality,”
The Journal of Moral Philosophy
, 8(1):
5–44.
–––, 2012,
Globalization and Global Justice:
Shrinking Distance, Expanding Obligations
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
–––, 2014, “Global Justice and Charity: A
Brief for a New Approach to Empirical Philosophy,”
Philosophy Compass
, 9(12): 884–893.
–––, 2018, “Consumption and Social
Change,”
Economics & Philosophy
, 35(1):
29–47.
–––, 2019, “Global Justice: What is
Necessary to Legitimate Coercion,”
Journal of Moral
Philosophy
, 16(3): 563–589.
–––, 2020,
Global Health Impact: Extending
Access on Essential Medicines for the Poor
, New York: Oxford
University Press.
–––, 2021, “Against Vaccine
Nationalism,”
Journal of Medical Ethics
, 47(11):
773–774.
Hayward, T., 2005,
Constitutional Environmental Rights
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Held, D., 1995,
Democracy and the Global Order: From the
Modern State to Cosmopolitan Governance
, Cambridge: Polity.
–––, 2004,
Global Covenant: The Social
Democratic Alternative to the Washington Consensus
, Cambridge:
Polity.
Held, V., 2008,
How Terrorism is Wrong: Morality and Political
Violence
, New York: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2010, “Terrorism,” in
Ethics and World Politics
, D. Bell (ed.), Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 342–357.
Herlitz, A., et al., 2021, “Just Allocation of COVID-19
Vaccines,”
BMJ Global Health
, 6.
Hessler, K., 2005, “Resolving Interpretive Conflicts in
International Human Rights Law,”
The Journal of Political
Philosophy
, 13(1): 29–52.
Hidalgo, J., 2021, “Open Borders,” in
Living
Ethics: An Introduction with Readings
, R. Shafer-Landau, (2nd
ed.), New York: Oxford University Press.
Hobbes, T., 1651,
Leviathan,
in R. Tuck (ed.),
Hobbes: Leviation
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1996.
Holder, C., and D. Reidy (eds.), 2013,
Human Rights: The Hard
Questions
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hountondji, P.J., 1997,
Endogenous Knowledge: Research
Trails
, Senegal: CODESRIA.
Hussain, W., 2012, “Is Ethical Consumerism an Impermissible
Form of Vigilantism?”
Philosophy & Public Affairs
,
40(2): 111–143.
Hutchings, K., 2019, “Decolonizing Global Ethics: Thinking
with the Pluriverse,”
Ethics and International Affairs
,
33(2): 115–125.
Ignatieff, M., 2003,
Empire Lite: Nation-Building in Bosnia,
Kosovo, and Afghanistan
, London: Penguin.
International Commission on Intervention and State Sovereignty,
2001,
The Responsibility to Protect
, Ottawa: International
Development Research Centre.
Jaggar, A., 2005a, “‘Saving Anima’: Global
Justice for Women and Intercultural Dialogue,” in
Real World
Justice
, A. Follesdal and T. Pogge (eds.), Dordrecht: Springer,
pp. 37–63.
–––, 2005b, “What Is Terrorism, Why Is It
Wrong, and Could It Ever Be Morally Permissible?”
Journal of
Social Philosophy
, 36(2): 202–217.
–––, 2009, “Transnational Cycles of
Gendered Vulnerability: A Prologue to a Theory of Global Gender
Justice,”
Philosophical Topics
, 37(2):
33–52.
–––, 2013, “Does Poverty Wear a
Women’s Face? Some Moral Dimensions of a Transnational Feminist
Research,”
Hypatia
, 28(2): 240–256.
–––, 2020, “Decolonizing Anglo-American
Political Philosophy: The Case of Migration Justice,”
Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume
, 94(1):
87–113.
Jaggar, A. (ed.), 2010,
Thomas Pogge and his Critics
,
Cambridge: Polity Press.
––– (ed.), 2014,
Gender and Global
Justice,
Malden: Polity.
–––, 2020, “Global gender justice,”
in
The Oxford Handbook of Global Justice
. T. Brooks (ed.),
Oxford Handbooks, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
James, A., 2012,
Fairness in Practice: A Social Contract for a
Global Economy
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Jecker, N.S., 2022, “Vaccine Passports and Health
Disparities: A Perilous Journey,”
Journal of Medical
Ethics
, 48: 957–960.
Jecker, N.S., A.G. Wightman, and D.S. Diekema, forthcoming,
“Vaccine Ethics: An Ethical Framework for Global Distribution of
COVID-19 Vaccines,”
Journal of Medical Ethics
.
Kant, I., 1795, “Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical
Sketch,” in H. Reiss (ed.),
Kant: Political Writings
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Khader, S., 2011,
Adaptive preferences and Women’s
Empowerment
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2014, “Empowerment Through
Self-Subordination? Microcredit and Women’s Agency,” in
Poverty, Agency, and Human Rights
, D.T. Meyers, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 223–248.
–––, 2018,
Decolonizing Universalism: A
Transnational Feminist Ethic
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Kleingeld, P. and E. Brown, 2013, “Cosmopolitanism,”
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2013 Edition),
Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2013/entries/cosmopolitanism/>.
Knight, C., 2009,
Luck Egalitarianism: Equality,
Responsibility, and Justice
, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.
Kukathas, C. 2021,
Immigration and Freedom
, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Kuper, A, 2004, Democracy Beyond Borders: Justice and
Representation in Global Institutions, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
–––, 2005a,
Global Responsibilities: Who
Must Deliver on Human Rights?
New York: Routledge.
–––, 2005b, “Global Poverty Relief: More
than Charity,” in
Global Responsibilities: Who Must Deliver
on Human Rights?
, A. Kuper (ed.), New York: Routledge, pp.
155–172.
Lang, A., 2010, “Humanitarian Intervention,” in
Ethics and World Politics
, D. Bell (ed.), Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 324–341.
Lauer, H., 2017,
Global Justice as Process: Applying Normative
Ideals of Indigenous African Governance
, New York:
Routledge.
Lenard, P. T., 2012,
Trust, Democracy, and Multicultural
Challenges
. University Park: Penn State University Press.
Lenard, P.T., C. Straehle, (eds.), 2012,
Health Inequalities
and Global Justice
, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Lichtenberg, J., 2013,
Distant Strangers: Ethics, Psychology,
and Global Poverty
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lindauer, M., 2020. “Experimental Philosophy and the
Fruitfulness of Normative Concepts,”
Philosophical
Studies
, 177(8): 2129–2152.
Lindauer, M. et al., 2023, “Comparing the effect of rational
and emotional appeals on donation behavior,”
Judgment and
Decision Making
, 15(3): 413–420.
Lippert-Rasmussen, K., 2013, “Global Injustice and
Redistributive Wars,”
Law, Ethics and Philosophy
, 1:
65–86.
Liu, Y., S. Salwi, and B.C. Drolet, 2020, “Multivalue
Ethical Framework for Fair Global Allocation of a COVID-19
Vaccine,”
Journal of Medical Ethics
, 46:
499–501.
Lister, M., 2010, “Citizenship, in the Immigration
Context,”
University of Maryland Law Review
, 70
(175).
London, A., 2011, “Justice and Research in Developing
Countries,” in
Global Health and Global Health Ethics
,
S. Benatar and G. Brock (eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
pp. 293–303.
Lu, C., 2012, “World Government,” The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2012 Edition), Edward Zalta (ed.),
URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2012/entries/world-government/>.
–––, 2016, “Colonialism as Structural
Injustice,” in
Political Theory without Borders
, R.
Goodin and J. Fishkin (eds.), Oxford: Blackwell.
–––, 2017,
Justice and Reconciliation in
World Politics
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Luban, D., 1980, “Just War and Human Rights,”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 9(2): 160–181.
Macdonald, T., 2015, “Political legitimacy in international
border governance institutions,” European
Journal of
Political Theory
, 14(4): 409–428.
Malm, A., 2021,
How to Blow Up a Pipeline: Learning to Fight
in a World on Fire
, New York: Verso.
Mancilla, A., 2016,
The Right of Necessity: Moral
Cosmopolitanism and Global Poverty (Off the Fence: Morality, Politics,
and Society)
, Washington D.C.: Rowman & Littlefield
Publishers.
Mandle, J., 2006,
Global Justice
, Cambridge: Polity
Press.
Margalit, A. and J, Raz, 1990, “National
Self-Determination,”
Journal of Philosophy
, 87(9):
439–461.
Martin, R. and D. Reidy, 2006,
Rawls’s Law of Peoples: A
Realistic Utopia?
Malden: Blackwell.
McKeown, M., 2021, “Structural Injustice”,
Philosophy Compass
, 16(7): 1–14.
–––, 2018, “Iris Marion Young’s
‘Social Connection Model of Responsibility’”,
Journal of Social Philosophy
, 49(3): 484–502.
McKim, R. and J. McMahan (eds.), 1997,
The Morality of
Nationalism
, New York: Oxford University Press.
McKinnon, C., 2022,
Climate Change and Political Theory
,
Cambridge: Polity.
McMahan, J., 2005, “Just Cause for War,”
Ethics
and International Affairs
, 19(3): 55–75.
–––, 2009,
Killing in War
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Mehta, U., 1999,
Liberalism and Empire: A Study in
Nineteenth-Century British Liberal Thought
, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Mellow, D., 2006, “Iraq: A Morally Justified War,”
Journal of Applied Philosophy
, 23(3): 293–310.
Menkiti, I., 2017, “Africa and Global Justice,”
Philosophical Papers
, 46(1): 13–32.
Metz, T., 2017, “Replacing Development: An Afro-communal
Approach to Global Justice,”
Philosophical Papers
,
46(1): 111–137.
Meyer, L., 2021, “Intergenerational Justice”, The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2021 Edition), Edward
Zalta (ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2021/entries/justice-intergenerational/>.
Meyer, L., and A. Gosseries, 2009,
Intergenerational
Justice
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Mill, J.S., 1859, “A Few Words on Non-Intervention,”
 [
Available online
].
Mills, C., 1997,
The Racial Contract
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
–––, 2019, “Race and Global
Justice,” in
Empire, Race and Global Justice
, D. Bell
(ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Miller, D., 1995,
On Nationality
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
–––, 2001, “Distributing
Responsibilities,”
Journal of Political Philosophy
, 9
(4): 453–471.
–––, 2001,
Principles of Social
Justice
, Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
–––, 2005, “Immigration: The Case for
Limits,” in
Contemporary Debates in Applied Ethics
, A.
Cohen and C. Wellman (eds.), Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing, pp.
193–206.
–––, 2007,
Nationalism and Global
Responsibility
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2016,
Strangers in Our Midst: The
Political Philosophy of Immigration
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
–––, 2020, The Political Philosophy of Refuge.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Miller, R., 1998, “Cosmopolitan Respect and Patriotic
Concern,”
Philosophy & Public Affairs
, 27(3):
202–224.
–––, 2010, Globalizing Justice: The Ethics of
Poverty and Power, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Miscevic, N., 2010, “Nationalism,”
The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Summer 2010 Edition), Edward N. Zalta
(ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2010/entries/nationalism/>.
Moellendorf, D., 1996, “Constructing the Law of
Peoples,”
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
, 77(2):
132–154.
–––, 2002,
Cosmopolitan Justice
,
Boulder, CO: Westview.
–––, 2005, “The World Trade Organization
and Egalitarian Justice,”
Metaphilosophy
, 36(1-2):
145–162.
–––, 2008, “Jus Ex Bello”
Journal of Political Philosophy
, 16(2): 123–136.
–––, 2009a, “Treaty Norms and Climate
Change Mitigation,”
Ethics and International Affairs
,
23(3): 247–265.
–––, 2009b,
Global Inequality Matters
,
Houndsmills: Palgrave Macmillan.
–––, 2022,
Mobilizing Hope: Climate Change
and Global Poverty
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Moellendorf, D., and Widdows, H. (Eds.), 2015,
The Routledge
Handbook of Global Ethics
(1st ed.), New York: Routledge.
Moore, M., 2001,
The Ethics of Nationalism
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
–––, 2016, “Justice and
Colonialism,”
Philosophy Compass
, 11(8):
447–461.
Morgan, M., 2020,
Care Ethics and the Refugee Crisis:
Emotions, Contestation, and Agency
, New York: Routledge.
Moseley, A., 2014, “Just War Theory,”
The Internet
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
, J. Fieser and B. Dowden (eds.),
available online
.
Nagel, T., 2005, “The Problem of Global Justice,”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 33(2): 113–147.
Nickel, J., 2007,
Making Sense of Human Rights
, Oxford:
Blackwell.
–––, 2014, “Human Rights,”
The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Spring 2014 Edition), Edward
N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/rights-human/>.
Nine, C., 2012,
Global Justice and Territory
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
–––, 2022,
Sharing Territories: Overlapping
Self-Determination and Resource Rights
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Nowicka, M. and M. Rovisco (eds.), 2011,
The Ashgate Research
Companion to Cosmopolitanism
, Aldershot: Ashgate.
Nussbaum, M., 1995, “Human Capabilities, Female Human
Beings,” in
Women, Culture and Development: A Study of Human
Capabilities
, M. Nussbaum and J. Glover (eds.), Oxford: Oxford
University Press, pp. 61–104.
–––, 1996, “Patriotism and
Cosmopolitanism,” in
For Love of Country: Debating the
Limits of Patriotism
, J. Cohen (ed.), Boston, MA: Beacon Press,
pp. 3–17.
–––, 2000,
Women and Human Development: The
Capabilities Approach
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
–––, 2006,
Frontiers of Justice ,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
–––, 2015, “Political liberalism and
global justice,”
Journal of Global Ethics
, 11(1):
68–79.
Nussbaum, M. and A. Sen (eds.), 1993,
Quality of Life
,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Oberman, K., 2013, “Can Brain Drain Justify Immigration
Restrictions?”
Ethics
, 123(3): 427–455.
Oberman, K., S. Fine, and L. Ypi (eds.), 2016,
Immigration As
A Human Right
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Ohlin, J.D., 2014, “Justice After War,” in
The
Oxford Handbook of Ethics of War
, S. Lazar and H. Frowe (eds.),
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Okeja, U., 2019,
African Philosophy and Global Justice
:
Critical Essays, New York: Routledge.
Olsthoorn, J., 2021,
The Right to Wage Private Wars of
Subsistence: Its Nature, Grounds, and Place in Revisionist Just War
Theories
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Neill, O., 1987, “Rights, Obligations and World
Hunger,” in
Poverty and Social Justice: Critical
Perspectives: A Pilgrimage Toward Our Own Humanity
, F. Jimenes
(ed.), Tempe, AZ: Bilingual Press, pp. 86–100.
–––, 2005, “The Dark Side of Human
Rights,”
International Affairs (Royal Institute of
International Affairs 1944
, 81(2): 427–439.
Okin, S., 1994, “Gender Inequality and Cultural
Differences,”
Political Theory
, 22(1): 5–24.
Orend, B., 2008, “War,”
The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy
(Fall 2008 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/war/>.
Owen, D., 2020,
What Do We Owe to Refugees? (Political Theory
Today)
, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Øverland, G., 2009, “Forced Assistance,”
Law and Philosophy
, 28(2), 203–232.
Parekh, S., 2017,
Refugees and the Ethics of Forced
Displacement
, New York: Routledge.
–––, 2020,
No refuge: Ethics and the Global
Refugee Crisis
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Parekh, S., and S. Wilcox., 2018, “Feminist Perspectives on
Globalization,”
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Spring 2018 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2018/entries/feminism-globalization/>.
Parker, W., 2018, “Climate Science”, The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2018 Edition), Edward N. Zalta
(ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2018/entries/climate-science/>.
Persad, G., and E. Emanuel, 2020, “The Ethics of COVID-19
Immunity-Based Licenses (”Immunity Passports“),”
JAMA
, 323(22): 2241–2242.
Pfaffe, T., 2020, “Resolving Ethical Challenges in an Era of
Persistent Conflict”, Carlisle, PA: Army War College.
 [
Pfaffe 2020 available online
]
Pogge, T., 1992, “Cosmopolitanism and Sovereignty”
Ethics
103(1): 48–75.
–––, 1994, “An Egalitarian Law of
Peoples”,
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 23(3):
195–224.
–––, 2001, “Priorities of Global
Justice”
Metaphilosophy
, 32(1/2): 6–24.
–––, 2002,
World Poverty and Human
Rights
, Cambridge: Polity Press.
–––, 2004, “‘Assisting’ the
Global Poor,” in
The Ethics of Assistance: Morality and the
Distant Needy
, D. Chatterjee (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
–––, 2008
World Poverty and Human
Rights
, Cambridge: Polity Press (second edition).
–––, 2010, “Responses to the
Critics” in
Thomas Pogge and His Critics
, A. Jaggar
(ed.), Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 175–250.
–––, 2013, “Concluding Reflections”
in
Cosmopolitanism versus Non-Cosmopolitanism
, G. Brock
(ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 294–320.
–––, 2014, “Gender Sensitive
Multi-Dimensional Poverty Measurement: A Participatory Proposal”
in
Oxford Handbook of Well-being and Public Policy
, M.
Fleurbaey and M. Adler (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pogge, T. and K. Horton (eds.) 2008,
Global Ethics: Seminal
Essays
, St. Paul, MN: Paragon House.
Pogge, T. and D. Moellendorf (eds.) 2008,
Global Justice:
Seminal Essays
, St. Paul, MN: Paragon House.
Pogge, T., and M. Sengupta, 2016, “Assessing the sustainable
development goals from a human rights perspective,”
Journal
of International and Comparative Social Policy
, 32(2):
83–97.
Pölzler, T., and I.R. Hannikainen, 2022, “The
Typicality Effect in Basic Needs,”
Synthese
, 200(5):
382.
Primoratz, I., 2013,
Terrorism: A Philosophical
Investigation
, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Rafanelli, L.M., 2021,
Promoting Justice Across Borders: The
Ethics of Reform Intervention
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Rawls, J., 1999,
The Law of Peoples
, Cambridge: Harvard
University Press.
Reed-Sandoval, A., 2020,
Socially Undocumented: Identity and
Immigration Justice
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Reidy, D., 2004, “Rawls on International Justice: A
Defense”
Political Theory
32: 291–319.
Reitan, E., 2018,
Personal Pacifism and Conscientious
Objection
, New York: Routledge.
Risse, M., 2005, “How Does the Global Order Harm the
Poor
?” Philosophy and Public Affairs
33:
349–376.
–––, 2012a,
On Global Justice
.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
–––, 2012b,
Global Political
Philosophy
, London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Risse, M. and G. Wollner, 2019,
On Trade Justice: A
Philosophical Plea for a New Global Deal
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Rodin, D., 2008, “Two Emerging Issues in Jus Post Bellum:
War Termination and the Liability of Soldiers for Crimes of
Aggression,” in C. Stahn and J. Kleffner (eds.)
Jus Post
Bellum:
Towards a Law of Transition from Conflict to
Peace
, The Hague: T.M.C Asser Press, pp. 53–76.
Ronzoni, M., 2013, “For (Some) Political and Institutional
Cosmopolitanism, (Even if) Against Moral Cosmopolitanism,” in
Cosmopolitanism versus Non-Cosmopolitanism
, G. Brock (ed.),
Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 156–174.
Rossi, E. and M. Sleat, 2014, “Realism in Normative
Political Theory,”
Philosophy Compass
, 9:
689–701.
Ryan, C.C., 1983, “Self-Defense, Pacifism, and the
Possibility of Killing,”
Ethics
, 93(3):
508–524.
Sager, A., 2018,
Toward a Cosmopolitan Ethics of Mobility: The
Migrant’s-Eye View of the World
, London: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Sangiovanni, A., 2007, “Global justice, reciprocity, and the
state,”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 35(1):
3–39.
Savulescu, J., 2020, “Good Reasons to Vaccinate: Mandatory
or Payment for Risk?”
Journal of Medical Ethics
, 47:
78–85.
Sen, A., 1980 “Equality of What?” in
The Tanner
Lectures on Human Values
, Vol. I, S. McMurrin (ed.), Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
–––, 1988, “The Concept of
Development,” in
Handbook of Development Economics
, C.
Hollis and T. Strinivasan (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier, pp.
9–26.
Sengupta, M., 2016, “Review Global Justice and Development.
By Julian Culp. Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2014. 215 pp. ISBN
978-1-137-38992-3,”
Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
,
19(4): 1065–1067.
Shue, H., 1980,
Basic Rights: Subsistence, Affluence, and US
Foreign Policy
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
–––, 2014,
Climate Justice: Vulnerability
and Protection
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2021,
The Pivotal Generation: Why We
Have A Moral Responsibility to Slow Climate Change Right Now
,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Singer, P., 1972, “Famine, Affluence and Morality”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 1: 229–43.
–––, 2002,
One World: The Ethics of
Globalization
, Melbourne: Text Publishing.
Slaughter, A., 2004,
A New World Order
, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Song, S., 2018,
Immigration and Democracy
, New York:
Oxford University Press.
Song, J., 2019, “Human Rights and
Inequality,”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 47(4):
347–377.
Sorell, T. and L. Cabrera (eds.), 2015.
Microfinance, Rights
and Global Justice
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Steiner, H., 2005, “Territorial Justice and Global
Redistribution,” in
The Political Philosophy of
Cosmopolitanism
, G. Brock and H. Brighouse (eds.), Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 28–38.
Sterba, J., 1996,
Global Justice
, Hoboken:
Prentice-Hall.
–––, 2008, “Welfare Libertarianism,”
Proceedings of the Xxii World Congress of Philosophy
, 50:
765–770.
Stilz, A., 2015, “Decolonization and
Self-Determination,”
Social Philosophy and Policy
,
32(1): 1–24.
–––, 2019,
Territorial Sovereignty: A
Philosophical Exploration
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
10.
Táíwò, O.O., 2022,
Reconsidering
Reparations
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
1–13.
Tamir, Y., 1993,
Liberal Nationalism
, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Tan, K., 2004,
Justice Without Borders: Cosmopolitanism,
Nationalism and Patriotism
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
–––, 2007, “Colonialism, Reparations, and
Global Justice,” in
Reparations: Interdisciplinary
Inquiries
, J. Miller and R. Kumar (eds.), Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
–––, 2008, “A Defense of Luck
Egalitarianism,”
Journal of Philosophy
, 105(11):
665–690.
–––, 2012,
Justice, Institutions, and
Luck
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2013, “The Demands of Global
Justice,”
Œconomia
, 3: 665–679.
Teichman, J., 1986,
Pacificism and the Just War: A
Philosophical Examination
, Oxford: Blackwell.
Unger, P., 1996,
Living High and Letting Die: Our Illusion of
Innocence
, New York: Oxford University Press.
United Nations General Assembly, 1948, “Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,”
 [
available online
].
United Nations Development Programme, 2020, “Human
Development Report 2020: The Next Frontier: Human Development and the
Anthropocene,”
 [
available online
].
–––, 2022, “Human Development Report
2021–2022: Uncertain Times, Unsettled Lives: Shaping our Future
in a Transforming World,” [available online].
United Nations General Assembly, 1948, “Universal
Declaration of Human Rights,”
 [
available online
].
Valdez, I., 2019, “Association, Reciprocity, and
Emancipation,” in
Empire, Race and Global Justice
, D.
Bell (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Valentini, L., 2012,
Justice in a Globalized World: A
Normative Framework
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2015, “On the Distinctive Procedural
Wrong of Colonialism,”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
,
43(4): 158–91.
Vanderheiden, S., 2008,
Atmospheric Justice: A Political
Theory of Climate Change
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Vasanthakumar, A., 2022,
The Ethics of Exile: A Political
Theory of Diaspora
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Voigt, K., 2022, “COVID-19 Vaccination Passports: Are They a
Threat to Equality?,”
Public Health Ethics
, 15(1):
51–63.
Walker, M.U., 2006,
Moral Repair: Reconstructing Moral
Relations after Wrongdoing
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Walton, A., 2014, “Do Moral Duties Arise from Global
Trade,”
Moral Philosophy and Politics
, 1(2):
249–268.
Walzer, M., 1981, “The Distribution of Membership,” in
Boundaries: National Autonomy and Its Limits
, P.G. Brown and
H. Shue (eds.), Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield.
–––, 1983, “Spheres of Justice: A Defence
of Pluralism and Equality,”
Philosophy
, 59(229):
413–415.
Watene, K., 2022,
Indigenous Philosophy and Intergenerational
Justice
, UNU-UNEP Stockholm 50+ Anniversary chapter.
 [
Watene 2022 available
]
Wellman, C.H., 2014, “Immigration,”
The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Spring 2014 Edition), Edward N. Zalta
(ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/immigration/>.
Wellman, C. H. and P. Cole, 2011,
Debating the Ethics of
Immigration: Is There a Right to Exclude
?, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Wenar, L., 2010, “Realistic Reform of International Trade in
Resources” in Thomas Pogge and His Critics, A. Jaggar (ed.),
Cambridge: Polity Press, pp. 123–150.
–––, 2016,
Blood Oil: Tyrants, Violence and
the Rules that Run the World
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Whyte, K.P., 2014, “Indigenous Women, Climate Change
Impacts, and Collective Action,”
Hypatia
, 29(3):
599–616.
Widdows, H., 2014,
The Routledge Handbook of Global
Ethics
, New York: Routledge.
Wilcox, S., 2021, “Borders and Migration,” in
Oxford Handbook of Feminist Philosophy
, A.
Sveinsdóttir, and K.Q. Hall (eds.), Oxford: Oxford
Academic.
Wiredu, K., 1996,
Cultural Universals and Particulars: An
African Perspective
, Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Wisor, S., et al., 2014, “The Individual Deprivation
Measure: A Gender-Sensitive Approach to Poverty Measurement,”
[available online].
Wolff, J., 2013,
The Human Right to Health
, New York: W.W
Norton & Company.
–––, 2000,
Just and Unjust War: A Moral
Argument with Historical Illustrations
, New York: Basic Books,
3rd edition.
Young, I., 2011,
Responsibility for Justice
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Ypi, L., 2012,
Global Justice and Avant-Garde Political
Agency
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2013a, “Cosmopolitanism Without If
and Without But,” in
Cosmopolitanism versus
Non-Cosmopolitanism
, G. Brock (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University
Press, pp. 75–91.
–––, 2013b, “What’s Wrong with
Colonialism?”,
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 41(2):
158–191.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs
Global Policy Forum
Human Rights Watch
JustWarTheory.com
,
 maintained by Mark Rigstad, Oakland University.
Engaged Theory Community
Global Health Impact
Related Entries
capability approach
|
colonialism
|
corruption
|
cosmopolitanism
|
economics [normative] and economic justice
|
egalitarianism
|
exploitation
|
feminist philosophy, interventions: political philosophy
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on globalization
|
globalization
|
immigration
|
justice: distributive
|
justice: intergenerational
|
justice: international distributive
|
justice: transitional
|
nationalism
|
pacifism
|
patriotism
|
political realism: in international relations
|
Rawls, John
|
responsibility: collective
|
rights: human
|
secession
|
sovereignty
|
terrorism
|
war
|
well-being
|
world government