Ikhwân al-Safâ’
First published Tue Apr 22, 2008; substantive revision Thu May 13, 2021
The Ikhwân al-Safâ’ or “Brethren of
Purity”, as their name is commonly translated, are the authors
of one of the most complete Medieval encyclopedias of sciences,
antecedent at least two centuries to the best known in the Latin world
(by Alexander Neckham, Thomas de Cantimpré, Vincent de
Beauvais, Bartholomaeus Anglicus, all dating back to the
13
th
century). The “encyclopedia” is a
collection of Epistles, the Arabic title of which is
Rasâ’il Ikhwân al-Safâ’ wa
Khullân al-Wafâ’
(Epistles of the Pure Brethren
and the Sincere Friends). It consists of extremely heterogeneous
materials, reworked to represent the whole educational training
intended for an
élite
(see later). It is very well
known, and a great deal of research into it has been done by Eastern
and Western scholars, but the variety of topics addressed and the
questions raised as to the identity and ideology of its authors remain
unsolved. In an isolated form, and under a false attribution, some of
these treatises came to the Latin Middle Ages through the Spanish
version by Maslama al-Majrîtî, which is traditionally
placed at the beginnings of the 11
th
century. This already
discussed chronology (Carusi 2000, 494–500) is recently
questioned by several scholars. The development of research in this
direction was encouraged by the pioneer study, Fierro 1996, part. 94
and 106–108; cf. also Hamdani 1978, 350; Hamdani, Soufan 2019,
11-12 (see infra).
1. Authorship
2. Naming and Dating
3. Ideological commitment
4. The extant
corpus
5. The classical heritage
6. The religious component
Bibliography
Texts
Translations
Select literature
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Authorship
The authors introduce themselves as a kind of
“brotherhood” (
ma‘âshara
) of sages.
Their work is addressed to “beginners,” who may thereby
increase their knowledge. The literary scholar Abû Hayyân
al-Tawhîdî (922-32/1023), basing his work on the ideas of
his master Abû Sulaymân al-Mantiqî (c. 912/c. 985),
and the mu‘tazili theologian ‘Abd al-Jabbâr
al-Hamadânî (c. 936/1025) have identified the names of
these authors. They are understood to be the
qâdî
Abu ’l-Hasan ‘Alî b. Hârûn
al-Zanjânî and his three friends, Abû Sulaymân
Muhammad b. Ma‘shar al-Bustî, called al-Maqdisî,
Abû Ahmad al-Nahrajûrî and al-‘Awfî. All
of these men came from Basra and were linked to the Chancellery
secretary Zayd b. Rifâ‘a (cf. Stern, 1946; Stern,
1964).The text of al-Tawhîdî is accurately examined in
Kraemer 1986, 136, 230 ff. This authorship is now questioned by
several scholars, because the learned who transmitted the Epistles to
al-Andalus appears to be Maslama al-Qurtubî
al-Majrîtî, not later than the first half of the
10
th
century.
2. Naming and Dating
With regard to the common denomination of “Ikhwân
al-Safâ’,” the old hypothesis by I. Goldziher
deserves mention: according to which the name could have been borrowed
from the famous collection of fables of indo-persian origin
Kalîla wa Dimna
to indicate a group of loyal friends.
Stern (1964, 421), however, considers the name as a way of hinting at
Ismâ‘îliyya
. The most convincing hypothesis
seems to be that which links the name to the content and goals of the
encyclopedia – the salvation of soul through attainment of
knowledge and purification of heart (Diwald 1975,
16–22). Recently, Poonawala hypothesized
“Ikhwân al-Safâ’” to be a pseudonym
hiding the identity of the authors (Poonawala 2015a, 264 and 272).
As to the date, in the 19
th
century F. Dieterici proposed
961 to 986, basing his estimate on the work of the seventeenth century
lexicographer Hâjjî Khalîfa and on the presence in
the treatises of verses by the famous poet al-Mutanabbî (d.
965). Massignon (1913) used a verse by the poet Ibn
al-Rûmî (d. 896) to establish these years as the earliest
possible date (cf. also Hamdani 1999, 76; Hamdani, Soufan 2019, 12;
28–29), and took the latest possible date to be the one
indicated by the definition of sine (
al-jayb
) given by the
Ikhwân. Such definition is not yet the one provided by
al-Battânî (d. 929; reference to vol. I, p. 46 of the
Bombay ed., 1887-1889, corresponding to I, 86, 14–15 of the
Beirut edition referred to in this article). The “expected
event” frequently mentioned in the encyclopedia would then be
the Fatimid conquest of Egypt, which can be traced back to those
years. On the basis of astronomical data, Casanova (1915) moved the
dates about a century forward, assigning the work to the years
1047–51.
Until some decades ago, the almost universally accepted dating was the
one deduced from the testimonies of al-Tawhîdî and
‘Abd al-Jabbâr al-Hamadânî (see above, 1.
Authorship). Marquet reconfirmed Dieterici's earlier hypothesis,
placing the compilation of the work between 961 and 980
(al-Tawhîdî's testimony is dated 981), but he also brought
the date back to 909, depending on the hypothesis of an
Ismâ‘îlî affiliation of the authors. Two
treatises have given rise to the idea of an Ismâ‘îli
interpretation: Epistle 48
On the invitation (da‘wa) to
God
and Epistle 50
On the kinds of administration
. The
encyclopedia would therefore be the oldest exposition of the
Ismâ‘îli doctrine, and consequently, the
“expected event” might have been the proclamation of the
Fatimid caliph ‘Abd Allâh al-Mahdî in
Ifriqiyya, which happened in that year (Marquet 1981, 95; Marquet
1972, 66). Hamdani summarizes various opinions concerning the dates of
the encyclopedia, and establishes that it was composed in its whole
between 873 and 909 (Hamdani 1978; Hamdani 1999, 78; Hamdani
2008; Hamdani, Soufan 2019, 15–16; Poonawala sides with
Hamdani’s chronology in Baffioni, Poonawala 2017,
307–308). Hamdani also thinks that the Ikhwân awaited the
advent of the Fatimids, the Fatimid character of the
Rasâ’il
not being in question (Hamdani 1979, 62);
he configures a precise role of the
imâm
in this epistle
(Hamdani, Soufan 2019, 6). The fourth section, apart from the first
and the last treatises, is claimed to be the core around which the
first three sections have been composed (Marquet 1998, 5), as well as
the culmination of the epistles, which demonstrates the importance of
the mystery of prophecy and of imâmate (Marquet 1998, 8–9
and note 21). Also Madelung recently sided with the hypothesis of
an Ismâ‘îlism of the Ikhwân
al-Safâ’. Recalling that the Ismâ‘îlis
of Mashriq, Iraq and Iran did not recognize the claims of ‘Abd
Allâh to be the expected
imâm
, being rather
committed to the Qarmat mission, Madelung hypothesizes that the
Ismâ‘îlis of Basra recognized as
imâm
the member of the family who had remained hidden in
Khurâsân, the same person who would also become the
founder of the secret brotherhood of the Ihwân
al-Ṣafâ’ (Madelung in print; but cf. De Smet 2017,
152, note 1). Madelung’s claim that the epistles are
“under the auspices of the hidden seventh imam” is
rejected by Poonawala, since “Muḥammad b.
Ismā‘īl’s name is never mentioned in the
Rasā’il
” (Baffioni, Poonawala 2017,
303–305, also on the basis of Hamdani’s opinions).
A quite different chronology is proposed for astronomical cycles by de
Callataÿ based on Epistle 36
On cycles and revolutions
. He
distinguishes three “medium conjunctions” of Saturn and
Jupiter occurring every 240 years and a longer conjunction occurring
approximately every 960 years. The year 571 (birth of the Prophet
Muhammad) marks a “longest conjunction” (from Libra to
Scorpio); the first “medium conjunction” in 809 is of no
importance to the Ikhwân; the second (from Sagittarius to
Capricorn) should take place in 1047, and would be the “imminent
conjunction” described in Epistle 48; the third (from Capricorn
to Aquarius) is awaited in 1286; and the “longest
conjunction” (from Aquarius to Libra) will take place in 1524
and will correspond to the rising of the
qâ’im
of
the Resurrection (de Callataÿ 2005, 55–57; Walker
et
al.
2015, 150–152, 156, 204–206).
The authors of the encyclopedia have also been confined to a
Mu‘tazilite approach, or placed in an earlier age, under the
Qarmat influence (Marquet 1977; Qarmats were the opponents of the
Fatimid caliph ‘Abd Allâh al-Mahdî). So did
Madelung many years ago; but considering his recent opinion, that the
Rasâ’il
repudiate the Fatimids’ claim to the
imâmate on the basis of the fact that a new-born of eight months
does not survive (that meaning that Muhammad ibn
Ismâ‘îl did not reach the Prophet’s rank; the
relevant texts are studied in Baffioni 2016 and 2018), Poonawala
wonders how he could ascribe the epistles to the Qarâmita, since
this is a a repudiation of the Qarâmita’s belief
(Baffioni, Poonawala 2017, 305–307).
More recent studies, on the line of a seminal article by Fierro
(Fierro Bello 1996; cf. Hamdani, Soufan 2019, 11–12, but also
Carusi 2000), have identified Maslama b. Qâsim al-Qurtubî,
called al-Majrîtî (d. 964, previously confused with the
scientist Maslama al-Majrîṭî, d. 1007) as the author
of the encyclopedia (cf. Hamdani 1999, 75; de Callataÿ 2013,
Kacimi 2014a, b, de Callataÿ, Moureau 2015). However, the one who
introduced in Spain the whole work is still to be considered Abu
’l-Ḥakam al-Kirmânî, d. 1066). Because of this
new discovery, the timing of the
Ras
â’il
has
been anticipated of several decades at least. So, the old attribution
of al-Tawhîdî and ‘Abd al-Jabbâr was revoked
in doubt, beginning with de Callataÿ who had previously accepted
it (de Callataÿ 2014; cf. Hamdani, Soufan 2019, 14–15; a
reconstruction of the journey, material and intellectual, of Maslama
al-Qurtubî in al-Andalus is in de Callataÿ, Moureau 2017).
Maslama al-Qurtubî has been also recognized as the author of
Rutbat al-ḥak
îm
(‘The level of the
wise man’) and
Gh
âyat al-ḥakîm
(‘The goal of the wise man’, being known in Latin as
Picatrix
), two important works on alchemy and magic
respectively that are now both to be reported to the first half of the
10
th
century. Scholars have also emphasized the impact of
the encyclopedia on these two works, and it has even been hypothesized
Maslama to be one of the authors of the epistles (Carusi 2000), which
should not date later than 950. In the light of this new chronology,
de Callataÿ 2014 examines the possible influence of the
Ikhwân on Ibn Masarra (d. 931), especially on his cosmology,
reporting this author to the Andalusi bâṭinî context
of the first half of the tenth century. If the epistles were
circulating in al-Andalus already before 950, and their compilation
must have begun some time before in the East, another consequence is
that the Ikhwân influenced al-Fârâbî and not
vice versa, as it was believed so far (Hamdani 2011). According to
Poonawala, the encyclopedia was composed after al-Kindî (d.
between 864 and 870) but before al-Fârâbî (d. 950;
Poonawala 2011, Introduction, 59). Among those who sustain the
attribution of the epistles to Maslama al-Qurtubî is also
Madelung who, therefore, rejects a too high dating of the epistles.
The scholar has speculated that Maslama not only brought the
encyclopedia to Spain, but also contributed to its composition: there
would have been a first version, no longer existing, compiled not long
before 937, the one described by al-Tawhîdî, and
consisting of previously existing epistles and of epistles especially
composed for the purpose; the Brotherhood would have been founded a
few decades earlier (Madelung 2018, 404).
In recent times, al-Tawhîdî’s and ‘Abd
al-Jabbâr’s attribution has been reconsidered by
emphasizing the Fatimid militancy of some among the pretended authors
of the encyclopedia (Reymond 2011, 124–125). Hamdani recalls
that, according to al-Tawhîdî, such personages were
Qarmats, so that al-Tawhîdî could accuse of eresy Zayd b.
Rifâ‘a, too (Hamdani, Soufan 2019, 7–8, where the
testimony of al-Qiftî is also discussed – that the alleged
authors were followers of the
imâm
‘Alî).
Hamdani even exploits al-Tawhîdî’s observation that
the
Rasâ’il
were widely read, as further evidence
that they would have been written long before (cf. also de Vaulx
d’Arcy 2019b). Poonawala shares historians’ doubts on
al-Tawhîdî’s reliability and concludes that his one
“is certainly a hostile witness” that implies the
authors’ affiliation with the Qarâmita of Basra (Baffioni,
Poonawala 2017, 294). Following Hamdani’s
“deconstruction”, the witness is considered to be
“very suspicious”, all the more so if one considers that
most medieval authors and modern scholars are used to equate the
Qarâmita with the Ismâ‘îlis (Poonawala in
Baffioni, Poonawala 2017, 298). Poonawala also emphasizes
Stern’s remark on the
qâdî
Abu
’l-Hasan ‘Alî b. Hârûn
al-Zanjânî – that ‘Abd al-Jabbâr writes
against the Ismâ‘îlis without mentioning the
Brethren at all (Baffioni, Poonawala 2017, 301–302).
A new hypothesis on the real author of the
Ras
â’il
has been formulated in Guillaume de
Vaulx d’Arcy’s doctoral dissertation. The author tries to
demonstrate that Ahmad b. al-Tayyib al-Sarakhsî, a pupil of
al-Kindî, composed the whole encyclopedia in about 894 in the
form in which we read it now (de Vaulx d’Arcy 2016, partially
reelaborated in de Vaulx d’Arcy 2019a [
non vidi
]).
But the questions of the identity and ideology of the Ikhwân
al-Safâ’ still remain unsolved. In recent times, Kacimi
2016 has come back to the relationship between the Ikhwân and
the Sufi thought. Poonawala refuses them to have been Sufi, though
some MSS, included the MS Atif Efendi 1618 (dated 1182, on which the
new edition of the Institute of Ismaili Studies is based), bear in the
title the mention of the Sufi school – or doctrines. Mayer
thinks that to result from a later, Sunni manuscript tradition,
“in which the acceptance, or at least toleration, of esoteric
material was made likelier by presenting it as proper to
Ṣūfī circles, whose respectability […] had been
established by a figure of the magnitude of Ghazālī.”
(Traboulsi et al. 2016, 7).
The traces of classical thought in the encyclopedia, as well as their
literary form, equally give an indication that the work was assembled
in the course of several decades between the 9
th
and the
first half of the 10
th
century, and that it may have
undergone further elaborations. Such a collective enterprise can be
considered as the result of a “stratified” compilation.
The supposed reworking of the whole by members of the Brotherhood
might also have shifted some Epistles from their original to their
present place. Even the headings of the four sections of the
encyclopedia are misleading. The way in which the treatises follow one
another is often inconsistent. The authors must have planned a special
use of the enormous amount of foreign philosophical and scientific
knowledge that is explained in the treatises and to develop it in
relation to the doctrinal conflicts and political changes that were
occurring in their own times. In this sense the presentation of the
encyclopedia as a “popular” work (Rudolph, 2004, 39)
should be rejected.
3. Ideological commitment
Because their aim is clearly salvation, it has often been supposed
that the
Rasâ’il
were inspired by the
Shî‘ites, or perhaps even the Ismâ‘îlis,
both of whom claim the ideological commitment of the encyclopedia. For
Marquet (1975, 585) the encyclopedia is the most ancient general
exposition of the Ismâ‘îli doctrine. In 1150, the
Sunni orthodoxy in the person of the caliph al-Mustanjid judged the
work heretical and sent the existing versions to be burnt. Yet in
spite of this, the encyclopedia survived and was translated into
Persian and Turkish (Corbin, 1964, 193–194). A harsh judgment on
the Ikhwân was delivered by the famous Mamlûk muftî
and theologian Taqî al-Dîn Ahmad ibn Taymiyya (d. 1328).
He considered them as Shî‘i esotericists whose doctrines
contradict the religion of Islam. For this reason, he rejected the
attribution of the
Rasâ’il
to such an eminent
religious scholar as Ja‘far al-Sâdiq (Michot 2008).
Attempts to define the Ikhwân's ideological commitment have been
made, but there has been no consensus on the matter. The
Ikhwân's view of ‘Alî as the Prophet's legitimate
legate (
walî
) persuaded some scholars to link them to
the
Shî‘a
, though scattered references in
negative terms to the “hidden”
imâm
appear
contrary to twelver Shî‘ism. Other elements have been
alleged as proofs of the Ikhwân's Ismâ‘îli
inspiration, such as the hierarchical structure of universe,
references to septenary cycles, distinction between elect and masses,
the use of Ismâ‘îli symbols (e.g., the bee as symbol
of the
imâm
, etc.). Already Stanislas Guyard in 1874
published a fragment of the Ikhwân reporting it to
Ismâ‘îlism; and so Paul Casanova in 1898,
discovering a manuscript of
Risâla al-Jâmi‘a
(Daftary 2007, 28 and 235; Hamdani, Soufan 2019,
10–11). Corbin (1964, 190) openly and radically affirmed
that the Ikhwân belonged to Ismâ‘îlism. He
gave an esoterical interpretation of the religious, philosophical, and
the Brotherhood rites described in Epistle 50
On the kinds of
administration
(Corbin 1950). Hamdani (1996, 146) considers this
treatise to be "the most explicitly Shî‘i or
Ismâ‘îli" of the entire encyclopedia. The main lines
of Corbin's presentation are shared, though in more nuanced terms, by
Mattila 2016. Corbin was followed by Marquet (1968, 1071) who stressed
their attacks on Mu‘tazili and Ash‘arite ideas. Stern
(1964, 416–417) and Diwald (1975, 26ff.) remarked that the
Epistles exercised their influence on the Ismâ‘îlis
only from the twelfth century. The concepts and historical ideas that
are at least close to those of the
Shî‘a
–
such as deprecation of the slaughter of Karbalâ’, the
allegorical interpretation of the Qur’ân and prophecy, or
the aversion to political governments and the hope that they will fall
when the present septenary cycle comes to an end (cf. Baffioni 2019b)
– show according to Stern (1964, 421) and later Bausani that the
authors were representative of an Ismâ‘îli tendency,
but not of the official
da‘wa
(propaganda) (Bausani
1978, 14–16; Bausani 1977, 323; Bausani 1978-1, 267, note 1).
Considering Epistles 50 and 48, Bausani agrees, albeit cautiously, on
the hypothesis of an Ismâ‘îlism of the Ikhwân
(Bausani 1978-1, 270; 278 and note 2), identified in their
“encyclopedic” approach to knowledge (Bausani 1985, 145;
cf. also Daftary 1998, 2 and 83). Marquet 1973, on the other hand,
recognizes in the encyclopedia (in Epistle 48 in particular,
On
the invitation (da‘wa) to God
) the official
Ismâ‘îli organization at the time (see also Marquet
1981, 95; Marquet 1998, 5, 7–8), and remarks that the propaganda
appeals here to philosophers, mystics, and rulers. According to
Hamdani (1996, 150), the event expected by the Ikhwân is the
advent of the Fatimids. Epistle 48, Marquet claims, was written before
910, and almost entirely preserved in its original form; but even if
it was composed after the advent of the Fatimids, its meaning would
not have been perverted (Marquet 1984, 77–78). Other scholars
have remarked that even when discussing number seven, so linked to
Ismâ‘îliyya
, the Ikhwân criticize the
"supporters of the seven" (Hamdani 1979, 68; Netton 1996,
28–29). Non-Ismâ‘îli ideas can also be found
in the work, for example the invitation to celibacy proper of Sufism
(but for contrary views see above). In general, the evidence
supporting such theories derives mostly from doctrines or parts of
doctrines hinted at in the encyclopedia. In denying the Brethren's
Ismâ‘îli commitment, for instance, Netton (1996, 28)
remarks that, if the issue of such an allegiance is widely debated,
scholars have much less addressed the "broader topic [...] of whether
the Ikhwân al-Safâ’ should even be considered to be
Muslims." The enormous variety of its contents and, often, their
inconsistency seem to have hindered scholars from reaching unanimous
conclusions on the authors' religious (or rather ideological)
commitment and, consequently, on their goals. The main lines of
research in this field were resumed in Kraemer 1992, 165–178;
cf. Hamdani 1999, 79 ; Hamdani, Soufan 2019, 10ff.).
4. The extant
corpus
The encyclopedia consists of 52 treatises divided into four sections
on the introductory (
al-riyâdiyya
), natural,
psycho-rational and metaphysical-theological sciences.
Two additional Epistles, entitled “Comprehensive Epistle”
(
al-Risâla al-Jâmi‘a
) and
“Supercomprehensive Epistle” (
Risâla
Jâmi‘a al-Jâmi‘a
) are thought to complete
the
corpus
and explain its esoteric (hidden) meanings. Two
versions of the
Jâmi‘a
are extant. One is
currently ascribed to al-Majrîtî, the Spanish scientist
and astronomer who is alleged to have transmitted the Epistles to
Spain. Godefroid de Callataÿ (2014, 200) identifies this
personage with Maslama al-Qurtubî (see above). The other is
ascribed to Ahmad ibn ‘Abd Allâh ibn Muhammad ibn
Ismâ‘îl ibn Ja‘far al-Sâdiq, the second
of the three “veiled” (
mastûr
)
imâm
s who were intermediate between Muhammad ibn
Ismâ‘îl and ‘Abd Allâh, the founder of
the Fatimid dynasty. Recent studies on aspects of this work by
Baffioni (2011b, 2012). According to De Smet, however, the existence
of the
imâm
Ahmad is not grounded on any reliable
historical evidence (De Smet 2017, 154–155). The attribution of
the
Rasâ’il Ikhwân al-Safâ’
and
of
Risâla al-Jâmi‘a
to one of the
“hidden
imâm
” would also be a late forgery
dating not beyond the 13
th
century (De Smet 2017, 157 and
160). The
Risâla Jâmi‘a
al-Jâmi‘a
is also (Tamir s.d., 18) ascribed to Ahmad,
which strengthens the link of the
corpus
with the
Ismâ‘îli tradition. While one cannot deny formal and
substantial relationship between the encyclopedia and the
“Comprehensive” Epistle, the
“Supercomprehensive” Epistle is never cited in the
Ras
â’il
, and it has been recognized by
Kacimi 2015, 331 as an outcome of the Ismâ‘îlization
of the Ikhwanian corpus. Hamdani 2008 hypothesizes a more recent
compilation for the
Risâla al-Jâmi‘a
. At
present, scholars take the study of the manuscript tradition of this
text, including an inquiry into its use and evidence in
Ismâ‘îli literature, to be an urgent task.
Each Epistle starts by stating its particular goal. All of them
contain a core of technical teachings and a conclusion regarding the
haqîqa
, the inner meaning of the contents. The texts
contain frequent invocations to the learning “brethren”
– that is, the elect who are studying the sciences – that
enhance their didactical and exhortative style; these invocations mean
that the students will be awakened “from the sleep of matter and
the negligence of ignorance” if they apply themselves
assiduously to study “with the assistance
(
ta’yyid
) of a spirit coming by God.”
The Epistles vary in length and their style is plain. There are,
however, numerous ambiguities, due to language and vocabulary, often
of Persian origin, and to mistakes in the transmission of the text.
Bausani (1978, 11) thinks the authors were of Persian origin (cf. now
Hamdani, Soufan 2019, 5). In general, however, the doctrines are fully
and clearly exposed, with repetitions where necessary to the didactic
function of the treatises.
Diwald (1975, 12–15) has even wondered whether there were in
fact several authors of the encyclopedia because of the use at times
of the first person singular. The basic question, of course, is
whether the authors unify the doctrines of more numerous groups, as
suggested by the different contexts and even their
inconsistencies.
The Ikhwanian encyclopedia is typical of the changes in Greek science
and philosophy during the tenth century as a result of the increasing
Shî‘a
influence. In the ninth century and at the
beginnings of the tenth century, the prominent philosopher Abû
Yûsuf Ya‘qûb b. Ishâq al-Kindî (d. ca.
870) had already developed single philosophical doctrines (e.g. in
cosmology or psychology; an examination of the contents of Epistle 41
On definition and descriptions
in the light of
al-Kindî’s treatise with the same title is made by
Poonawala in Baffioni, Poonawala 2017, 277 ff.). Though elaborating
them in an original way, al-Kindî had not tried to combine such
doctrines with the basics of Muslim faith. Theological considerations
remain parallel with philosophical issues. The physician Muhammad ibn
Zakariyyâ’ al-Râzî (d. ca. 925), mainly
interested to natural philosophy, had even questioned the legitimacy
of prophecy.
At the time of al-Fârâbî (d. 950), ancient knowledge
will be considered as an organic whole – not only a sum of
theoretical elaborations, but as a real encyclopedia of sciences. It
should provide at every level, from the most elementary to the most
complex, the necessary premises for the acquisition of ultimate
knowledge – the knowledge of God. Then, authentically Muslim
thought – religious in the strict sense – begins with the
substitution of the schemes of Greek philosophy for those of the
Sacred Text. This is what I. Netton (1989) defined as “the
progressive estrangement from the Qur’anic Creator
Paradigm.” Ancient knowledge is the basis on which the
patrimony of faith is built: sciences are significant not merely in
themselves so much as a partial reflection of the single and unique
divine Being. See Heck (2008, 2002) for interesting articles that
focus on both the Ikhwân’s and
al-Fârâbî’s ‘willingness to turn to
philosophy to explain religion and trace its boundaries.’
The sense of truly “Muslim” science is largely a product
of the ideological commitment of the authors. Consequently, scholars
arrived to consider the Ikhwân al-Safâ’ as
representatives of a "humanistic approach" to Islam (e.g., Albert
Reyna 2007). This view, however, is challenged by their attitude, to
see the ultimate goal of their gnosiological experience as an attempt
of separating the soul from the ties of matter and purifying it to
achieve happiness in the hereafter (see also Reymond 2012, 126;
Raymond 2014, 150). For them, purification can be reached by following
prophetic revelation with the help of reason. Certainly, the study of
ancient sciences is not viewed, as by "orthodox theologians", as a
vehicle of heresy and even atheism. Rather, sciences explain the
underlying reality of the universe and so allow rational understanding
of the contents of Revelation and of religious Law. As Reymond (2012,
143) puts it, the Brethren's intellectual attitude demonstrates "une
mentalité en construction," announcing "une avancée
dans une mentalité forgée par le
terminus ad
quem
prévisible d'une autorité du dogme achronique
et indépassable."
The blending of scientific and religious issues is evident from the
beginning in the encyclopedia. Sciences should be the main topic in
the first and the second sections and, partially, in the third, and
theology in the rest of the
corpus
. In spite of the fact that
ancient texts are always quoted with great accuracy from a
philological point of view, the Ikhwân deeply rework the Greek
sources in line with their goals that are completely different from
those of the ancients. Thus religion should not be underestimated in
order to attain the best comprehension of its various contents and
real aims.
5. The classical heritage
Let us approach the first feature of the encyclopedia, that is, its
reworking the of foreign “scientific” contents. Various
cultural elements come together in the Epistles: Babylonian, Indian
and Iranian astrology, Indian and Persian narrative, biblical
quotations and cabbalistic influences, references to the New Testament
and Christian gnosis. A good survey of these contents can be
found in Netton 1991, 53ff., 89ff. More recently, the scholar has
emphasized as "Philosophically, the
Rasâ’il
[...] constitute a marvelous epitome of the mixing of Aristotelianism
and Neoplatonism in the caldron of Islamic intellectual endeavour"
(Netton 2009, 109). In spite of the commixtion of Aristotelian and
Neoplatonic ideas – e.g., for identifying Aristotle's active
cause with the faculties of the Universal Soul, "Aristotle's
terminology is all-pervasive in the
Rasâ’il
" (ibid., 111–112). Most
attention is paid to the Greeks, from the so-called
“pre-socratics” to Plato, Aristotle, Plotinus and the
Stoics. The encyclopedia can thus be considered a
compendium
of foreign sciences, deserving attention even by those who are only
interested to ascertain the extent of what the Arabs knew of ancient
doctrines at that time.
Comparisons between the Ikhwân's quotations and the extant
Arabic versions of classical works often show that they might have
used the same translations at our disposal now. When such comparisons
are not possible, the ancient
excerpta
usually correspond to
the extant original texts. We should conclude, then, that in quoting,
reporting – and, perhaps, translating – ancient sources
the Ikhwân display the same philological and philosophical
expertise associated with the scholars to whom we owe the flourishing
of the translation movement in Baghdâd. In some cases, they have
even preserved the only Arabic fragments of Greek authors known to us,
as exemplified by the well-known case of the story of Giges from
Plato's
Republic
in Epistle 52. (The story of Giges is
analyzed in Baffioni 2001, 168–170, 175–178). Platonic
references in the encyclopedia are also scarce. The majority of them
are found in the fourth section and concern the trial and death of
Socrates. There is also a hint at the doctrine of reminiscence, that
is seldom mentioned in Muslim sources (cf. for the Ikhwân
al-Safâ’ Epistle 42, III, 424, 15). The Ikhwân are
also informed about the Platonic view on pleasures and about Plato's
conception of the soul as consisting of three distinct parts: the
rational soul, which resides in the head; the irascible soul, which
resides in the heart and is the seat of courage; and the appetitive
soul, the seat of desire, which resides in the abdomen (III, 68,
4–6). The Platonic references are religiously rather than
philosophically oriented. That can perhaps be explained by the
influence of the Hellenistic
curricula scientiarum
(courses
of study) designed for philosophers. These began by a reflection on
the Stoic
bios theoretikòs
(the philosophical attitude
towards life), continued with Aristotelian works representing the
“scientific” side of knowledge, and ended with Platonic
writings, representing the “theological” knowledge
(D’Ancona Costa 1996, 30–31). The religious approach to
ancient heritage leads the Ikhwân to consider philosophy as an
“imitation of God according to human capacity.” This
definition immediately clarifies Hellenism as the authors' first
theoretical and historical reference. Their source is here Plato or,
rather, his Hellenistic reading (Kraus 1986, 99, note 4).
Although the Ikhwân appear widely Aristotelian (for instance,
for their presentation of the terrestrial world or the theory of
knowledge rooted in sensation), the wealth of the available sources
led the “Pure Brethren” to support their doctrines by a
variety of theoretical models, often melted together (which even
affects the consistence of the Ikhwanian idea of God, Islamic and
Neoplatonic at the same time, Netton 2009, 108).
The first topic addressed in the first section are the so-called
“quadrivium” (a Latin term meaning “the four
ways”) sciences (arithmetic, geometry, astronomy and music):
Epistle 1 deals with arithmetic, Epistle 2 with geometry, Epistle 3
with astronomy and Epistle 5 with music. Arithmetic, geometry and
music are later approached together in Epistle 6
On
proportions
. Between these two treatises another one is added,
Epistle 4
On geography
:
‘ilm al-hay’a
(literally “cosmography”) was evidently considered part of
astronomy – but Epistles 4 and 5 are copied in an inverted
order in some MSS.
References for the various sciences are, generally identifiable:
Euclid, Nicomachus and sometimes even Archimedes for mathematical
tenets (Epistles 1, 2 and 6); Ptolemy supports astronomy and geography
(Epistles 3 and 4); the Pythagoreans and again Nicomachus are the
sources for musical theory (Epistles 5 and 6). The Greeks already saw
arithmetic and geometry as the necessary, though not unique, means of
attaining philosophical knowledge.
Much of this section is devoted to logic, the “instrument”
of sciences according to Aristotle and a view widely shared by Muslims
(see Epistles 10–14). These treatises take the place of grammar,
logic and rhetoric, that in Middle Ages constituted the
“trivium” (in Latin: “the three ways”)
sciences and were the basis of a “liberal arts” education.
There is no place for poetry or for rhetorical devices in the
encyclopedia. Dialectics increases damaging opposition among the
learned. Although the Ikhwân appear interested in spoken
language and even in phonetics, they never approach grammar as a
science. Rather, they examine the technique of the
“universal” form of language – logic. In the
well-known 10
th
century debate on the superiority of
grammar or of logic, they might have sided with the Christian logician
Abû Bishr Mattâ ibn Yûnus more than with the
grammarian Abû Sa‘îd al-Sirafî (cf. Heck 2008,
11 for a new perspective on this issue). “Trivium” was
considered preparatory for the “quadrivium,” which was in
turn considered preparatory for the study of philosophy and theology.
The “trivium” and “quadrivium” sciences are
described in the encyclopedia in an original way as distinct from that
of other Muslim writers as well as the Latin west (de Callataÿ
2005, 61–62). Hellenistic influence is remarkable even when the
Ikhwân rely on Aristotelian logic. The logical treatises include
paraphrases of Porphiry's
Isagoges
, which the later Greeks
considered to be the first book of
Organon
(
Rhetoric
and
Poetics
were taken to be its last books). It is followed
by Aristotle's
Categories
,
De interpretatione
,
Prior
and
Posterior Analytics
.
This choice of texts shows that the Ikhwân conform to the
“old” tradition that restricted research to the first
Books of the
Organon
, not to that of their great contemporary
al-Fârâbî, who expanded it to the whole logical
corpus
. This might be due to the religious aims of the
encyclopedia. Religious matters can only be treated by relying on the
sound (
sahîh
) method for knowledge, while procedures
aiming at mere persuasion or linked to the attainment of that which is
useful (and not true) are not to be employed. Logic is no longer a
simple instrument of science as it was for Aristotle, but a true
science, perhaps the most important one. The Brethren call it
“the scale of sciences” through which the wise men are
able to discern “true from false in speeches, right from wrong
in opinions, truth from vanity in beliefs and good from evil in
acts” (cf., e.g., Epistle 7, I, 268, 14–16).
Epistle 7
On the theoretical arts
carefully sketches the
Ikhwân's epistemological vision. A sort of “table”
of human sciences is given (I, 266, 14–274, 21). There are three
kinds of sciences in hierarchical progression: the
“propaedeutical” (or preparatory,
al-riyâdiyya
again; “a designation not absolutely
unambiguous” according to de Callataÿ in El-Bizri; de
Callataÿ 2017, 78 ff.), those imposed by religious Law
(
al-shar‘iyya al-wad‘iyya
) and the
“philosophical sciences allowing the full comprehension of
truth” (
al-falsafiyya al-haqîqiyya
, higher than
the religious sciences). The sciences listed first in the table are
labelled “propaedeutical” just as the
“trivium” and “quadrivium” sciences of the
encyclopedia, but here the term is used in a totally different sense.
It concerns matters of practical utility, such as reading and writing,
grammar and poetry (someway close to the “trivium”
sciences), but also magic, mechanics, arts, trades, history and so on.
Although the Ikhwân state that the sciences of the third group
– the “philosophical” in the higher sense of the
word – are the object of their Epistles, they do not coincide
exactly with the contents of the encyclopedia, at least, with those of
the
corpus
now available. So, the table can be considered as
evidence of the fact that the whole encyclopedia has been produced
during a very long period of time. On the one hand, it might have been
retained as a first draft of the future enterprise; on the other, it
shows the further elaborations of the
corpus
over the
centuries.
Epistles 7 and 8 explicitly recall the Aristotelian division of the
theoretical and practical sciences. Epistle 7 is extensively based on
Aristotle (when the Ikhwân introduce the nine
“philosophical questions,” they are thinking of the
Aristotelian categories, cf. I, 262, 14–266, 7; Epistle 29, III,
35, 6–7; Epistle 40, III, 345, 6–346, 6; Epistle 42, III,
513, 14–16 and 514, 13–516, 5). However, the ultimate goal
of the scientific investigation is identified with the path towards
hereafter and even connected to asceticism where scientists and
prophets follow the same way: Aristotelian science is linked to the
Isma‘ili teaching (
ta‘lîm
, cf. I, 274,
20–275, 4). The “programmatic” aim of Epistle 7
leads us to consider it as the ideal introduction to the whole
corpus
. On the other hand, the authors'
Ismâ‘îli commitment is proven by the fact that in
the complementary treatise
On the practical arts
the ancient
“banausic” (utilitarian) activities are dealt with which
were held in high esteem in Ismâ‘îlism (cf. Lewis
1943; Marquet 1961; and, more recently, Yasien 2006 and Daftary 2007,
115).
Although the content of the first section is the most
“uniform,” inconsistencies are found already in it. This
is especially clear in Epistle 9, which portrays the “ideal wise
man” from the standpoint of the encyclopedia, where moral
edification is never separated from theoretical teaching. The approach
is more than an echo of the well known Aristotelian division of
philosophy: it stems from the view of the Ikhwân that he who
searches for true wisdom must be endowed with a true mind as well as a
pure heart. Epistle 9 breaks the series of the scientific treatises.
Various moral behaviours are considered, with the support of a long
series of anecdotes about prophets and wise men, which
provide textual evidence that the Ikhwân may in practice
have found asceticism (Sufism?) as another way of attaining or
“enhancing” purification (cf. Epistles 6, 16 and 24).
The composed and eclectic character of the whole is even more evident
in the three other sections. In the second section, the Epistles
15–22 follow the Hellenistic arrangement of Aristotle's works on
physics. Epistle 15 echoes the themes addressed in the
Physics
. In Epistle 16, entitled,
On the heaven and the
world
, the Ikhwân are shown to be in line with the Muslim
tradition which transformed the ancient
De caelo
into a new
book
De caelo et mundo
. Epistle 17 deals with
De
generatione and corruptione
. Epistle 18 about meteorological
phenomena and Epistle 19 about minerals recall the contents of
Meteorology
I-III and IV respectively.
Meteor.
IV,
sometimes considered spurious and “the first chemical work in
ancient world” according to scholars, was the basis of the
theories of “chemical” or “alchemical”
transformations in Islamic sciences and of mineralogy. The Ikhwanian
treatise deals with mineralogy, geology and gemmology and in the
correspondence established between the celestial and sub-lunar worlds,
between the stars and minerals, it expresses one of the main tenets of
alchemy. Further Aristotelian echoes are found in Epistle 24
On
sense and sensation
, to which Epistle 35
On intellect and
intelligible
corresponds in the third section. After topics
concerning nature, such as the human body in Epistle 23, conception in
Epistle 25, and man as microcosm in Epistle 26 [on the relationship
between micro- an macrocosm see Maukola, 2009 and, in quite a new
perspective, Nokso-Koivisto, 2011) the most important topic for the
Ikhwân, the human spiritual dimension is addressed. It is
discussed in terms of the relationship between soul and body in
Epistles 27 e 28, life and death in Epistle 29, and pleasures in
Epistle 30. The Aristotelian theory of the immovable mover, which is
introduced in Epistle 37
On love
, to explain the movement
imparted to stars by the heavenly Universal Soul accomplishes its
religious meaning. It serves to confirm the love human beings feel for
permanence and their hatred for death: God is the most beloved as the
everlasting cause of all beings.
On the other hand, natural treatises reflect the availability of the
rich range of mineralogical, botanical and agricultural works, but
none of the works by Aristotle on minerals or plants were known to the
Arabs. The
corpus
aristotelicum
on animals reached
them (apart from the
De partibus
and the
De generatione
animalium
) in an abridged form under the title of
Kitâb
al-hayawân
, but Epistle 22
On animals
is quite far
in its content and goals from the Aristotelian
corpus
. In
fact, it places the whole matter within the well-known metaphysical
dispute on the superiority of man on animals (besides some attempts of
viewing it even in an "ecological perspective"; see, more recently,
Darraz 2012; Raymond 2014, 151). .
The authors' view of embryology (Epistle 25) is also a collection from
different sources. On the one hand, the Ikhwân were not
physicians, though they display extensive knowledge of anatomy and
share the Aristotelian thesis of the origin of the embryo from the
sperm and menstrual blood, while they did not accept the ancient
Hippocratic theory as developed by Galen, of a female sperm coexisting
with that of the male in the formation of the human being. On the
other hand, they emphasize an astronomical/astrological approach to
embryology that was not in Greek sources. It is considered to be a new
idea introduced by Islamic scientists, from whom it passed into the
Latin world. Greek sources for Epistle 37 on love also vary.
The real deviation from Aristotelianism is Epistle 20
On
nature
. In that it shows how nature as taught by Aristotle was
received and theorized by the authors, this treatise could serve as
the perfect introduction to the section on natural sciences. However,
its main part regards angelology. It also introduces a Neoplatonically
inspired conception of Nature, suggestive of
Ismâ‘îli philosophical positions, as Abû
Ya‘qûb al-Sijistânî's representation of Nature
as “agent power” and “principle of
movement”.
Though the Ikhwân never mention Plotinus explicitly, the third
section opens with two treatises that deal with rational beings as
understood by the Pythagoreans (Epistle 32) and the Ikhwân
al-Safâ’ (Epistle 33). These treatises demonstrate beyond
doubt that these authors considered themselves true Muslim
Pythagoreans. Pythagoras is said to be “a monotheist from
Harrân.” The Pythagorean idea of the one as the
principle of numbers, and not as a number itself explains that God is
the origin of beings, and not a being like others. If God is like the
one, the Active Intellect is compared to number 2, the Universal Soul
to number 3 and Nature (or Matter) to number 4 (cf. e.g. Epistle 40,
III, 347, 5). The encyclopedia resumes Pythagorean mathematical and
musical theories and adopts a numerological approach on the basis of
the Pythagorean tenet that “existing beings correspond to the
nature of number.” The whole reality is considered under a
numerological perspective. Every aspect of nature – and even of
religion – follows a numeric pattern. This should demonstrate
that the cosmos – also introduced as a
“macranthropos” (man as the pattern of the external world
as a whole) in Epistle 34 – is organized according to recurrent
and well-determined quantitative models, being at the same time
completely dependent on God, the principle of everything just as one
is the root of each number. According to de Callataÿ,
Aristotelian themes are “reshaped”, for didactic purposes,
in a Neoplatonic frame (El-Bizri; de Callataÿ 2017, 88), so that
those who organized the corpus in its final version “are
definitely to be ranged amongst hard-line Neoplatonists in medieval
Islam” (El-Bizri; de Callataÿ 2017, 89).
Among the other philosophical schools and doctrines quoted in the
encyclopedia an important role is played by hermetism (the religion of
the philosophical elite in Ancient Egypt, founded by Hermes
Trismegistus), as in Epistle 3
On astronomy
and, more
broadly, in Epistle 52 (Marquet 1973, 1988). Ancient theories on the
movements of the stars will finally evolve in Epistle 36
On cycles
and revolutions
into that which, following Cumont, G. de
Callataÿ (1996, 36–37) has defined as a “fatalisme
astral.”
6. The religious component
Just like philosophy, as a way towards salvation, is an imitation of
God and implies that the disciple is provided not only of an acute
mind, but also of a pure heart (through which God will be recognized
as the sole and the supreme teacher in knowledge and deeds, as the
Holy Book demonstrates, cf., e.g., Qur., II, 31: ‘And He taught
Adam the names', mentioned in Epistle 28, III, 18, 14–16 and in
Epistle 31, III, 112, 19 and 141, 13–14; cf. also Epistle 23,
II, 381, 17), the Ikhwân consider prophetic message (both
esoteric and exoteric, hidden and clear) as the second necessary means
for human salvation and happiness. This brings us back to the second
aspect of the encyclopedia, its religious commitment.
We already saw that the Ikhwân rework the classical heritage in
religious terms. They also deal with doctrinal questions linked to
religion. Epistle 42
On opinions and religions,
the other
“programmatic” treatise of the encyclopedia that opens the
fourth section, is a discussion of the basic ideas of the Brotherhood
such as the multifaceted epistemological problems, the origin of the
world, morals and theodicy and the imamate as well as the various
doctrines critically considered by the Ikhwân, such as
eternalism and dualism. It also develops the apologetic side of
Ikhwanian thought.
Epistle 40
On causes and effects
addresses the
crucial problem of the origin of the world. The Ikhwân subvert
to religious purposes Aristotle’s teleological approach that
“nature does not make anything in vain.” Understanding
creation, one of the basic Muslim tenets, is recognized as the highest
attainment of knowledge. So, the ancients are defended from the charge
of eternalism (cf. III, 356, 11–18) and, for the sake of the
masses, creation is even explained through the comparison of God with
a confectioner. However the Ikhwân – like the
Ismâ‘îlis – adopt Neoplatonic views as the
best explication of the origin of the world by God. The world, then,
emanates from God through the hypostases of Intellect and Soul.
Emanationism is the philosophical expression of creation; it also
explains the encyclopaedic structure of the treatises. The various
levels of reality down to the three kingdoms of the generated beings
(animal, vegetable and mineral) originate continuously through
intermediaries from the One. For this reason, by acquiring all the
sciences from the lowest to the highest it is possible to attain the
common source of everything, the ‘science of God’ in the
double sense of pertaining to God and concerning God – the
ancient metaphysics (
metà ta physikà)
no
longer indicates what comes “after” physics but what is
“beyond” it. Thus, rather than a mere foreign source,
Neoplatonism (merged with Neopythagorism) can be considered as the
Ikhwân’s proper philosophy. Philosophy as imitation of God
continues as the guiding principle of the Ikhwân’s system,
together with equal emphasis on divine revelation.
From Epistle 43 onwards, the Ikhwân build their own system from
a religious point of view, often in the fragmentary style typical of
Muslim esoteric writings. Epistle 43 considers the way towards God
through purification; then the beliefs of the Ikhwân
al-Safâ’ and of the so-called “Divines,” the
heirs of a prophetic tradition whose origin is ascribed to the ancient
wise men (Epistle 44). Epistle 45 expounds the organization of the
Brotherhood based on mutual help. Epistle 46 considers the faith, not
only of Islam, but also of the former monotheistic religions and of
the ancient wise men. Epistle 47 considers prophecy and the imamate.
Epistle 48 discusses propaganda. Epistle 49 deals with a key theme in
the encyclopedia – the existence of disembodied agents in the
world, based on the Ikhwân’s idea that the full truth of
the Qur’ân, obscured in their time by ignorance and
distortions, could only be restored thanks to the study of the
rational sciences developed by the Greek philosophers. In the
surviving manuscript tradition, Epistle 49 appears in two versions, a
short and a long one. The short one clearly preserves an older text.
The long one contains a detailed elaboration of part of the short one.
The short version also consists of two parts; the second is a
commentary on the Epistle by an author other than that of the first,
namely Maslama al-Qurtubî al-Majrîṭî, during
his stay at Basra in 936-7. At the same time, Maslama should have also
composed what de Callataÿ identified as the “short
version” of
Epistle on Magic
, to which Epistle 49 was to
be an introduction. In fact, both treatises aim to prove the existence
of spiritual beings: magic in all its forms consists precisely in the
acts of such spiritual beings. The long version would have been
composed by Maslama after his return to Cordoba. In the printed
editions, the final part of the short version is added to the text of
the long version, but the addition is not found in any of the MSS
examined in the new edition, while it might be found in the MS on
which the first printed edition was based (that of Bombay, 1887-1889);
but we do not know if such MS still exists (Madelung et al. 2019,
1–3). Epistle 49 is a complex exposition of Ikhwanian cosmology,
remarkably different and richer than that exposed in any other
epistle. This exposition is merged with the authors’ religious
vision on the relationship between God and the world (Uy in Madelung
et al. 2019, 8). A new vision of the Ikhwân’s magic as the
“conceptual and practical pivot” of their
religious-political reform based on inclusion and tolerance is in Saif
2019; a study of the so-called “longer version” of Epistle
52 in Saif 2020. Epistle 50 discusses the various kinds of
'administration' (physical, spiritual, personal, familiar, etc.), the
core of the Epistle being the religious and philosophical approach to
God. In the new edition, the treatise appears purged of all the
passages that led Corbin to his esoteric interpretation (Baffioni in
Madelung et al. 2019, 148 ; Baffioni 2019d). Some MSS provide
additions and/or versions radically different from those reported in
the other consulted manuscripts and in the printed versions available
(Baffioni in Madelung et al. 2019, Appendices A–D,
237–364; with regard to additions to other epistles see Baffioni
2019a, 2019c). Noteworthy is the addition in MS Esad Efendi 3638 that
explains the story of Adam meant as the progenitor of huimankind, the
first speaking prophet and the heavenly
imâm
(ed. and tr.
by Baffioni in Madelung et al. 2019, 237–277; cf. also Baffioni
2020b). Apparently, Epistle 51 duly gathers up the threads of the
whole (often repeating contexts of previous treatises), but its
recent editor has also ascertained the existence of two versions of
it, maybe even three (Alshaar in Madelung et al. 2019, 381ff.).
Epistle 52
On magic
is the last in
the
corpus
, missing in some editions and considered by
some scholars (Bausani 1978, 12 and 279) as spurious, and of little
value, so the
Risâla
al-Jâmi‘a
would be the true fifty-second one
(cf. de Callataÿ 2011, 3). However, de Callataÿ inclines to
the view that the ‘short version’ of this treatise,
namely, the part approximately corresponding to the first thirty pages
of the Beirut edition, is genuine (de Callataÿ 2011, 5ff).
That a text exists in different versions is not an isolated case. Two
versions of Epistles 32 have been found by Walker (Walker et al. 2015,
5, 7–8). Similarly, there are two versions of Epistle 48; one is
based on a group of MSS that appear to have been copied from an
Ismâ‘îli specimen; the other is based on a second
group of MSS, including Atif Efendi 1618. Despite the permanence of
Shî‘ite elements, Hamdani believes that the material in
the second version has been rearranged in order to provide a version
acceptable to Sunni-Sufi readers. Although one must believe to the
story handed down by al-Tawhîdî, there must have been an
earlier shî‘i version of the
Rasâ’il
(Alshaar in Madelung et al. 2019, 383).
The existence of different versions of a same epistle raises questions
about the history of its transmission and about how such existence
should be interpreted. Which version should have priority? Should the
various versions be considered to be different stages or different
aspects of the same authorial project? On what basis should they be
assessed? The date of a MS, although of considerable importance for
determining its value, cannot be taken as the sole criterion for
deciding the authenticity or the greater antiquity of a textual
tradition, since a late MS may have been copied from a very ancient
one. Also, due to problems related to the transmission of MSS
themselves, to their dating, and to the nature of the various
epistles, it is difficult to decide which versions is older or more
authentic (Alshaar in Madelung et al. 2019, 382–383).
The
corpus
addresses other main religious issues in Muslim
faith: the unity and uniqueness, and the attributes of God, angels,
human destiny, good and evil, resurrection. Divine will and power are
also considered when trying to explain evil in the world, though, of
course, Muslim faith does not allow identifying God as the cause of
evil (Epistle 19). Ultimately, the Ikhwân attribute it to human
responsibility, or, better, to the responsibility of creatures in
general and they do so in quite a Mu‘tazilite perspective. In
the hierarchical disposition of universe there are
“intermediate” beings to which everything that happens in
the world may be related. God, a quite remote “first
beloved” is beyond all this, like the kings, whose orders are
behind everything built during their reigns. Epistle 39
On the
kinds of movement
considers the movement of the whole cosmos,
from that of the stars down to those (natural and voluntary) of human
beings. Its aim is to demonstrate the existence of a God who created
the world and who will bring it to an end. In Epistle 27 souls (that
are self-subsistent according to the ancient doctrine) unite
themselves to human bodies in order to ensure human salvation; hence
wise men and prophets are said to be the “physicians of the
souls” (III, 13, 7 ff.). The main religious topic is, however,
resurrection, thoroughly examined in Epistle 38 where it is also
considered as the supreme science (III, 288, 3–5). The theme was
already addressed in Epistle 29 (wisdom is recognizable in death in
that it allows the vision of God, hence the highest sorrow is
damnation). On the same line, Epistle 30 states that the real
“Hell” is earth, “Paradise” is heaven.
However, the Ikhwân deem as “providential” the
ignorance of the beauties of the afterlife, which might urge people to
desire death before the natural end of life. In doing so, they are far
from the Pythagorean doctrine that considered the soul as a fallen
divinity imprisoned within the body as in a “tomb”.
In conclusion, whereas in
Ihsâ’
al-‘ulûm
(“The Enumeration of the
Sciences”), al-Fârâbî deals with Muslim
sciences such as theology (
kalâm
) and law
(
fiqh
), the Ikhwân mainly stress religion. In the
Rasâ’il
, the usual distinction between
philosophy/sciences (the rational or
‘aqliyya
knowledge) and theology (the received or
naqliyya
knowledge),
or between reason and faith is not valid as both are combined.
On the formal side, the religious commitment appears in the frequent
Qur’anic quotations in support of ancient doctrines, sometimes
through interpretations that are not in line with the theological
ones. Above all, the Ikhwân appropriate the Muslim ideal of
attaining happiness in this world and the hereafter and indicate in
the treatises how to reach it. In physical terms it is by caring for
the body, which when healthy and balanced is the condition of the
purification of the soul. In metaphysical terms, the purified soul is
said to be capable of knowledge, so of being saved – even
though, like the Ismâ‘îlis, the Ikhwân deny
salvation as attainable through solely philosophy.
Prophethood is an undeniable part of the theoretical experience
featured by the Ikhwân. Their political vision is linked to this
and implies that attainment of happiness is considered in political
terms, too, where it results in examination of what has to be
accomplished to be worthy of entering the entourage of the
imâm.
In Epistle 40 the science of the esoteric
interpretation of the Qur’ân (explaining its hidden
meaning) is emphasized as the highest divine gift (in doing this the
Ikhwân give an interpretation of Qur., III, 7 which precedes
that, much more well-known, given by Averroes two centuries later, cf.
III, 344, 10–345, 5).
The second pivot of the Ikhwân's philosophy in addition to
creation is their discussion of the imamate. It has its first origin
in Epistle 31
On the diversity of languages
(now considered
from the standpoint mentioned in the title by Albert Reyna 2009). Here
the Ikhwân show that religious creeds change as a result of
language transformations. More particularly, differences and contrasts
within the
umma
due to changes in the Arabic language are
linked to the debate regarding the identity of the Messenger's deputy,
which is the main cause of schism in Islam “until their
time,” the Ikhwân say (cf. Epistle 31, III, 153,
8–10 and 165, 8–12). While everybody agrees on the tasks
of the
imâm
, there is a disagreement as to his
identity. This is because imamate is of two kinds: prophetic and
regal. Usually the tasks of the ruler are neatly distinguished from
those of the prophet, because governance is a mundane business and
prophecy is related to the life to come (III, 497, 5–6). On
occasion these qualities are combined in a single person, who is then
the delegated prophet and also the ruler (III, 495, 18–19).
While the Prophet Muhammad was both prophet and ruler of the Muslim
umma
, so ensuring its best defence, his possible successors
did not always match him in nobility. Subsequently, prophecy and
governance are sometimes found in two different persons, one of whom
is the prophet delegated to that community and the other the person
who has been given power over them. They support one another (III,
495, 19–21). The real problem seems, then, to be the dignity of
the person appointed as the caliph, which alone is the condition of a
legitimate prophetical succession. The Ikhwân's specific idea on
the identity of such a person is not clear. In addition, there is
apparently no distinction between the prophet, the
imâm
or the ruler with regard to the required qualities, as Epistle 47
On the essence of divine Law
demonstrates. The sole
“doctrinal” solution offered in the encyclopedia seems
that a ruler with ascetic tendencies can legitimately take the place
of the
imâm
.
The political ideas of the Ikhwân al-Safâ’ have not
been extensively analyzed by scholars, except when they have been
considered as a political movement. (The Ikhwân's interest in
political issues is mainly emphasized by Eastern scholars who in
general incline towards the hypothesis of their being
[“filo]-Isma‘ili.” Cf. Hijab, 1982; Tamir,
1983, 89–108). In fact, the “Pure Brethren” are
contrasted with the “philosophers,” who were understood to
have taken an outsider position with regard to the political
expectations of the society in which they lived, as a consequence of
their evaluation of Plato's
Republic
(cf. e.g. Kraemer 1987
and Stroumsa 2003). However, the Ikhwân do not fail to approach
policy from a theoretical standpoint and the philosophical doctrines
developed in their Epistles can be understood to be a functional
element of their political vision. In Epistle 48
On the invitation
to God
, a
madîna fâdila
(perfect city) is
featured – less known but no less worthy than that proposed by
al-Fârâbî. This time the Ikhwân do not hide
themselves behind the ancient Platonic heritage: they openly adapt a
Greek idea to a Muslim situation, and various aspects of the
'Ismailism' of the treatise have been highlighted in Baffioni,
2014a.
Were the Ikhwân Ismâ‘îlis? This of course
opens the way to the second side of the argument – the
Ismâ‘îli commitment of the Ikhwân.
The saying “
dîn
and
mulk
are
twins” in reference to the prophet and the king empowered to
perform the functions of the
imâm
in the sense preached
by the Ikhwân perfectly fits the Fatimid rulers. If this
hypothesis is tenable, the debated “traditions” mentioned
in Epistle 31 with reference to the misunderstandings due to the
diversity of languages might be understood as the Fatimid versions of
the divine Law. If the Ikhwanian “Lawgiver” is identified
with the historical incarnation of the Isma‘ili faith, that is,
with the Fatimid caliph, and if the “perfect city” is the
one ruled by these caliphs, then the Ikhwân al-Safâ’
are his
du‘â’
. Epistle 48, with the mention
of the term
da‘wa
in the title, might further support
the hypothesis of a project of concrete militancy by the
Ikhwân.
The Ikhwân appear as the learned people who have the task of
promoting propaganda (
da‘wa
). Sometimes they even seem
to appropriate the qualities of the king-
imâm
; in
Epistle 47 they introduce themselves as the best guides for the
defence of Islam in terms of
al-hukamâ’ wa
al-falâsifa wa al-fudalâ’
(“wise men,
philosophers and excellent people”) and of the
anbiyâ’
,
khulafâ’
al-anbiyâ’ wa
al-a’imma
al-mahdiyûn
(“prophets, successors of the prophets
and well-guided
imams
,” IV, 126, 5-17). That the
Ikhwân aim to be the guides of the elect community is further
confirmed by a passage in Epistle 9. The ascetics are described as
those “who know the shortcomings [of the world], who crave for
the hereafter and are convinced of it, firmly rooted in its science,
that is the sincere Friends of God, [His] faithful servants, the cream
of all [His] creatures, whom the Creator – may [He] be exalted
– called ‘persons of understanding, persons of view,
persons of mind’” (I, 357, 5–9). These qualities
correspond to those of the Ikhwân engaged, as the leaders of
their community, in their philosophy of salvation; but they also fit
the prophets and the
imâm
s
perfectly. From
this point of view the reading of the Holy Book our authors have in
mind – rather than a Shî‘i or Isma‘ili
perspective – might be the
ta’wîl
performed
in their own encyclopedia, where God's Word is continually quoted and
commented (Baffioni 2012b; Gobillot 2013). And they refer to the
spiritual city as “our spiritual city,” which coincides
with Paradise.
In Epistle 47 the legacy of the Prophet is said to be inherited by
“the most intelligent” (
al-‘uqalâ’
al-akhyâr
) which emphasizes the epistemological function of
the Shî‘ite caliph. In this case a temporal ruler, the
“ruler
imâm
,” is no longer necessary
because the rational Law is the real guide, “incarnated”
in the “rightly guided”
imâm
and in his
reason and knowledge. In contrast to Baffioni 2006, 149–150,
Heck (2008, 205–209) seems to side with Netton's reading of the
intellect-guide in terms of a rational intellect.
Further elements allow a better defining of the Ikhwân's
political position. The history of early Islam is approached from a
Shî‘i perspective; some important events of the prophet
Muhammad's life and mission are recalled; soon attention shifts to two
fatal events which led to the defeat of Shî‘ism, the
battle of Siffîn and the slaughter of Karbalâ’. In a
passage on the struggles for imâmate, the “representatives
of the Muhammadic (
Muhammadiyya
) Law and of the Hashimi
federation” (cf. Epistle 31, III, 165, 11–12) are opposed.
If the latter are the ‘Abbasids (or even the supporters of
Abû Hâshim, son of Muhammad ibn al-Hanafiyya), the former
should be understood as the direct descendants of the Prophet through
Fâtima, whence the Ikhwân's strict ‘Alid militancy
should be demonstrated.
Another passage from Epistle 31 (III, 153, 11–156, 9) might urge
to suppose that the authors' target was the caliph
al-Ma’mûn, in spite of his pro-‘Alid policy (and
political support of Mu‘tazilism). The Ikhwân report on a
ruler, who encouraged politico-religious controversies among the
‘ulamâ’
(learned) of different persuasions,
claiming for himself the right to interpret the Law on the basis of
the Mu‘tazili doctrine of the created Qur’ân.
Juxtaposed to him is
ahl bayt al-nubuwwa
(the immediate
family of the Prophet: Muhammad, his daughter Fâtima, his cousin
and son-in-law ‘Alî and their sons, al-Hasan and
al-Husayn) as the guarantors of the true tradition concerning
prophetic succession. The Ikhwân could then still be identified
with the supporters of the strict ‘Alid conception of the
imamate, according to which the science of caliphate belongs to the
family of the Prophet only.
If this hypothesis is tenable, Epistle 31 contains not only the core
of the Ikhwân's political thought, but also of their
Ismâ‘îli commitment. Their presentation of the
“perfect city,” in which mutual love is the basis and the
goal of the community, does not help us to ascertain whether the
Ikhwân have in mind spiritual rule or a true government such as
that of the Fatimid caliph, of whom they might be the
du‘â’
. Scholars tend to consider this
“perfect city” as utopian as the Farabian (cf. e.g.
Marquet 1973, 153; Hamdani 1999, 81). The defeat of evil people is
also often foreshadowed in the encyclopedia (cf. e.g. Epistle 31, III,
154, 19–24 and 156, 2–3). In Epistle 4 the Ikhwân
present a cyclical conception of ruling dynasties, and state that
“the dynasty of the evil reached its apex,” hence only
decline and diminution are to be expected in the future. According to
Tibawi (1955, 37, note 4), the Ikhwân forebode here the fall of
the ‘Abbasids. Cf. also Tibawi, 1978, 60.) The dynasty of the
good begins when the learned agree “on a unique doctrinal school
and a single religion,” commit themselves to mutual help, and
desire the vision of God and doing God's will as their [sole] reward
(I, 181, 14–182, 2). In Epistle 48, the Ikhwân
declare that the one whose advent in the world is expected is coming,
and it will be a wonderful event (IV, 190, 13), in which the welfare
of both religion and the world will be gathered. Magic, astronomy and
true dreams helped them establish even the year and month of the
advent of the “lord of the cycle” (
sâhib
al-amr
) – but, of course, the date is not mentioned in the
encyclopedia.
Grounding himself on the
Sîrat ibn Ḥawshab
of the
Fatimid
dâ‘î
Ja‘far b. Mansūr
al-Yaman (d. second half of the 10
th
century), Hamdani
hypothesizes the epistles to have been written under Ahmad b.
‘Abd Allâh b. Muḥammad b.
Ismâ‘îl’s imâmate, who was considered as
the expected
imâm
. Ahmad, however, was not their author,
but their
munshi’
(“issuer”). Therefore, the
Ikhwân al-Safâ’ would have been a think-tank at the
service of the Fatimid propaganda, a secret organization with the
function of gaining support from the non-initiates (Hamdani, Soufan
2019, 1–2). Moh. Jalub Farhan, however, describes the
Ikhwân as opposed to the Buyid regime, in spite of the fact that
it supported science (1999, 30, 31). The Brethren who cooperated in
the final version of the encyclopedia in the tenth century might have
been disguised adversaries of the Buyids, who were
Shî‘ites, not Ismâ‘îlis. Poonawala
also proposes the
Rasâ’il
to have been written by
propagandists belonging to the entourage of Ahmad, half a century
after al-Ma’mûn (Walker et al. 2015, 66; De Smet 2017,
157–158). More recently, Hamdani has noted in the encyclopedia
also Sunni-Sufi elements; thereby, the Ikhwân would be a secret
think-tank made up of
tafḍîlî
Sunnis (that
is, they assert the superiority of ‘Alî over all the
successors of the Prophet), who hoped to replace the ‘Abbasids
with a ‘alid caliphate, displaying in their work also liberalism
and religious tolerance (Hamdani, Soufan 2019, 32–33).
On the whole, the political vision outlined above appears to
be founded on doctrinal elements of Ismâ‘îli
nature. The division between the “elect” and the
“masses” destines the former only for investigation of the
curriculum studiorum
at the basis of the “philosophy of
salvation”. A rigid hierarchy of universe links each level of
existence, physical and spiritual, to that which precedes and that
which follows it where the beings that belong to the various levels
cannot go beyond them. (It should be noted that this may question the
idea of “evolution” in the Ikhwân that some scholars
have ascribed to them; cf. e.g. Vernet Ginés 1990, 190; Marquet
1992). The didactic aims of the ruler mirror the aspect of
Ismâ‘îli propaganda known as
ta‘lîm
(lit.: “teaching”).
The influence of the
Epistles
on later (after the
12
th
century) Ismâ‘îli literature
has been widely recognized (Stern 1964, 416–417; Diwald 1975, 26
ss.; Daftary 2007, 236). Their content has been transmitted and
developed by subsequent thinkers of various persuasions. It is
noteworthy, however, that extended literal quotations (and even
translations) from the Ikhwân al-Safâ’ are found in
the famous Ismâ‘îli thinker and missionary
Nâsir-e Khosrow (1004–1074) (see Saccone 2007,
67–68; Baffioni 2013c and Poonawala in Baffioni, Poonawala
2017, 285 ff.): this may be a proof of the use of the
Rasâ’il
in 11
th
century
Ismâ‘îli authors. If the Ikhwân
al-Safâ’ were Ismâ‘îlis or in someway
linked to Ismâ‘îlism, then
Ismâ‘îlism influenced a much wider part of Islamic
thought and culture than previously recognized.
With regard to an Ismâ‘îli commitment to the
Ikhwân al-Safâ’, some aspects of their philosophy of
nature (geology, mineralogy, and botany) have been recently examined
(Baffioni 2008, 2009, 2010b; de Callataÿ 2008). Mineralogy and
botany have been explored in order to find similarities with
Ismâ‘îli philosophy, in particular with the
Ismâ‘îli thinker and missionary Hamîd
al-Dîn al-Kirmânî. The result is that they share
many basic views, but the Ikhwân has greater detail. Moreover,
some aspects of the Ikhwân’s cosmology, and in particular
their use of the term and concept of
ibdâ‘
, are
relevant in identifying the similarities (Baffioni 2011a; 2013b;
2013d).
However, the radical change of hypotheses about the dating of the
epistles after the identification of the role that Maslama
al-Qurtubî would have played in them, also led to rethinking the
political (and possibly messianic) beliefs of the Ikhwân and the
attempts to identify the polemical targets of their assertions.
Madelung remarks that while the Fatimids were used to see both
Umayyads and ‘Abbasids as usurpers and enemies of
‘Alî, the Ikhwân had no longer contacts with any
hidden
imâm
, as they believe that the advent of the
Mahdî has been delayed to a remote future. Therefore, they
adopted a quietist attitude towards the existing regimes: their
purpose was only to purify Islam through the study of ancient thought,
thus preparing humanity for the advent of the true
Mahdî
.
Maslama al-Qurṭubî remained a loyal subject of the Umayyad
governor of Andalus, ‘Abd al-Raḥmân III. Hence, the
Ikhwân no longer regarded the Umayyads as the inveterate enemies
of the Family of the Prophet. The
imâm
, direct
descendants of the Prophet, are instead described as the only ones
entitled to rule humanity, and for this purpose divinely chosen; but
their persecutors – although denounced as tyrants – are
not identified. Kacimi 2019 returns on the anti-‘Abbasid polemic
of the Ikhwân.
Bibliography
Texts
Kitâb al-Maqâlîd al-Malakūtiyya (The
Book of the Keys to the Kingdom) by Abū Ya‘qūb
Isḥâq b. Ahmad al-Sijistânî (d. after
361/971)
, 2011/1432 H., Ismail K. Poonawala (ed.), Tunis:
Dâr al-Ġarb al-Islâmî.
Rasâ’il Ikhwân al-Safâ’ wa
Khullân al-Wafâ’
, 1957, Mustafâ
Ghâlib (ed.), Beirut: Dâr al-Sâdir, 4 vols. I
indicate the volume, page(s) and line(s) of each quotation or
reference; addings in square brackets. (Other eds.: Bombay
1887–89, 4 vols.; Khayr al-Dîn al-Ziriklî, Cairo
1928, 4 vols.; ‘Ârif Tâmir, Beirut – Paris
1995, 5 vols.).
Al-Risâla al-Jâmi‘a
,
Tâj
Rasâ’il Ikhwân al-Safâ’ wa
Khullân al-Wafâ’
, 1949-51, Jamîl
Salîbâ (ed.), Damascus: al-Majma‘
al-‘Ilmî al-‘Arabî;
Al-Risâla
al-Jâmi ‘a
,
Tâj
Rasâ’il Ikhwân al-Safâ’ wa
Khullân al-Wafâ’
, 1984
2
,
Mustafâ Ghâlib (ed.), Beirut: Dâr al-Andalus.
Risâlat Jâmi‘a al-Jâmi‘a
li-Ikhwân al-Safâ’ wa Khullân
al-Wafâ’
, 1970
2
, ‘Ârif
Tâmir (ed.), Beirut: Dâr Maktabat al-Hayât.
Translations
Albert Reyna, R.F., 1995, “La ‘Risâla fî
mâhiyyat al-‘isq’ de las Rasâ’il
Ijwân al-Safâ’,”
Anaquel de Estudios
Arabes
, 6: 185–207.
Baffioni, C., 1989,
L’Epistola degli Ihwan
al-Safâ’ «Sulle opinioni e le religioni»
,
Napoli: Istituto Universitario Orientale.
–––, 1994,
Frammenti e testimonianze di
autori antichi nelle Rasâ’il degli Ihwân
al-Safâ’
, Roma: Istituto Nazionale per la Storia
antica.
–––, 2006,
Appunti per
un’epistemologia profetica. L’Epistola degli Ihwan
al-Safâ’ «Sulle cause e gli effetti»
,
Napoli: Istituto Universitario Orientale – Guida.
–––, 2010a,
On Logic. An Arabic Critical
Edition and English Translation of Epistles 10–14
(
Epistles of the Brethren of Purity
), New York: Oxford
University Press in Association with the Institute of Ismaili
Studies.
–––, 2013a,
On the Natural Sciences. An
Arabic Critical Edition and English Translation of Epistles
15–21–
(
Epistles of the Brethren of Purity
),
New York: Oxford University Press in Association with the Institute of
Ismaili Studies.
Baffioni, C., Poonawala, I.K., 2017,
Sciences of the Soul
and Intellect, Part III. An Arabic Critical Edition and English
Translation of Epistles 39–41
(
Epistles of the Brethren
of Purity
), New York: Oxford University Press in Association with
the Institute of Ismaili Studies.
Bonmariage C., 2008/2009, “De l'amitié et des
frères: l’Épître 45 des Rasâ’il
Ikhwân al-Safâ. Présentation et traduction
annotée,”
Bulletin d'Etudes Orientales
, 58:
315–350 and 443–444.
de Callataÿ, G., 2003, “Ikhwân al-Safâ: des
arts scientifiques et de leur objectif,”
Le
Muséon
, 116: 231–258.
de Callataÿ, G., Halflants, B., 2011,
On Magic. An Arabic
Critical Edition and English Translation of Epistle 52a
(
Epistles of the Brethren of Purity
), New York: Oxford
University Press in Association with the Institute of Ismaili
Studies.
Dieterici, F., 1969,
Die Philosophie bei den Arabern im X.
Jahrhundert n. Chr., Gesamtdarstellung und Quellenwerke
,
Hildesheim: Olms (repr. Leipzig: Hinrich, 1868, 1876, 1871,
1872).
Diwald, S., 1975,
Arabische Philosophie und Wissenschaft in
der Enzyklopädie. Kitab Ihwan as-safa (III). Die Lehre von Seele
und Intellekt
, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
El-Bizri, Nader, 2012,
On Arithmetic and Geometry. An Arabic
Critical Edition and English Translation of Epistles 1 & 2
(
Epistles of the Brethren of Purity
), New York: Oxford
University Press in Association with the Institute of Ismaili
Studies.
El-Bizri, Nader, de Callataÿ, G., 2017,
On
Composition and the Arts. An Arabic Critical Edition and English
Translation of Epistles 10–14
(
Epistles of the Brethren
of Purity
), New York: Oxford University Press in Association with
the Institute of Ismaili Studies.
Gautier Dalché, P., 1988, “Epistola Fratrum
Sincerorum in Cosmographia:
une traduction latine inédite
de la quatrième Risâla des Ihwân
al-Safâ’
,”
Revue d’histoire des
textes
, 18: 137–167.
Giese, A., 1990,
Ihwân as-Safâ’, Mensch und
Tier vor dem König der Dschinnen
, Hamburg: Meiner.
Goldstein, B.R., 1964, “A Treatise on the Number Theory from
a Tenth-century Arabic Source,”
Centaurus
, 10:
129–160.
Goodman, L.E., 1978,
The Case of Animals versus Man before the
King of the Jinn: A Tenth-century Ecological Fable of the Pure
Brethren of Basra
, Boston: Twayne Publishers.
Goodman, L.E., McGregor, R., 2010,
d The Case of Animal versus
Man Before the King of the Jinn. An Arabic Critical Edition and
English Translation of Epistles 22
(
Epistles of the Brethren
of Purity
), New York: Oxford University Press in Association with
the Institute of Ismaili Studies.
Hamdani, Abbas, Soufan, Abdallah, 2019,
The Call to
God. An Arabic Critical Edition and English Translation of Epistle
48
(
Epistles of the Brethren of Purity
), New York: Oxford
University Press in Association with the Institute of Ismaili
Studies.
Ikhwân al-Safâ’, 1996,
Les révolution
set les cycles (Épîtres des Frères de la
Pureté, XXXVI)
, Traduction de l’arabe, introduction,
notes et lexique par G. de Callataÿ, (Sagesses musulmanes, 3),
Beyrouth – Louvain-la-Neuve: Al-Bouraq –
Academia-Bruylant.
Lizzini, O., 2009, “L’angelologia nelle epistole dei
Fratelli della purezza: l’esempio della natura,” in
G. Agamben, E. Coccia eds.,
Angeli. Ebraismo Cristianesimo
Islam
, Milano: Neri Pozza, pp. 1965–2012.
Michot, J., 1974–75, “L’épître de
la résurrection des Ikhwân al-Safâ’,”
Bulletin de Philosophie Médiévale
, 16–17:
114–148.
Jamil Ragep, F., Mimura, T., 2015,
On Astronomia. An Arabic
Critical Edition and English Translation of Epistle 3
(
Epistles of the Brethren of Purity
), New York: Oxford
University Press in Association with the Institute of Ismaili
Studies.
Madelung, W. et al., 2019,
On God and the World. An
Arabic Critical Edition and English Translation of Epistles
49–51
(
Epistles of the Brethren of Purity
), New
York: Oxford University Press in Association with the Institute of
Ismaili Studies.
van Reijn, E., 1995,
The Epistles of the Sincere Brethren
(Rasa’il Ikhwan al-Safa’): An Annotated Translation of
Epistles 43 to 47
, Montreux: Minerva Press.
Sánchez, I., Mongomery, J., 2014,
On Geography. An
Arabic Critical Edition and English Translation of Epistle 4
(
Epistles of the Brethren of Purity
), New York: Oxford
University Press in Association with the Institute of Ismaili
Studies.
Shiloah, Amnon, 1964, “L’épître sur la
musique des Ikhwân al-Safâ’,”
Revue des
Etudes islamiques
, 32: 125–162.
–––, 1966, “L’épître
sur la musique des Ikhwân al-Safâ’,”
Revue
des Etudes islamiques
, 34: 159–193.
Tornero Poveda, É., 2006,
La disputa entre los animales
y el hombre/Ijwân al-Safâ’
, Madrid:
Siruela.
Traboulsi, S. et al., 2016,
On Companionship and
Belief. An Arabic Critical Edition and English Translation of Epistles
43–45
(
Epistles of the Brethren of Purity
), New
York: Oxford University Press in Association with the Institute of
Ismaili Studies.
de Vaulx d’Arcy, G., 2019a,
Les Épîtres des
Frères en Pureté (Rasâ’il Ikhwân
al-Safâ’) Mathématique et Philosophie
, Paris:
Les Belles Lettres [
non vidi
].
Walker, P.E. et al., 2015,
Sciences of the Soul and Intellect
Part I. An Arabic Critical Edition and English Translation of Epistles
32–36
(
Epistles of the Brethren of Purity
), New
York: Oxford University Press in Association with the Institute of
Ismaili Studies.
Wright, O., 2010,
On Music.  An Arabic Critical Edition and
English Translation of Epistle 5
(
Epistles of the Brethren of
Purity
), New York: Oxford University Press in Association with
the Institute of Ismaili Studies.
Yusufji, D.H., 1943, “The Forty-third Treatise of the
Ikhwân al-Safâ’,”
Muslim World
, 33:
39–49.
Select literature
Albert Reyna, R.F., 2007,
Humanismo islámico: una
antropología de las Epístolas de los Hermanos de la
Pureza
, Ibrahîm Albert Reyna, Almodovar del Río:
Junta Islamica, Centro de Documentación y Publicaciones.
–––, 2009, “El concepto de lenguaje en las
Epístolas de los Hermanos de la Pureza
,”
Anaquel de Estudios Arabes
, 20: 5–17.
Baffioni, C., 2001, “Frammenti e testimonianze platoniche
nelle Rasâ’il degli Ikhwân
al-Safâ’,” in G. Fiaccadori ed.,
Autori
classici in lingue del Vicino e Medio Oriente
, Roma: Istituto
Poligrafico e Zecca dello Stato, pp. 163–178.
–––, 2008, “L’influence des
Ikhwân al-Safâ’ sur la minéralogie de
Hamîd al-Dîn al-Kirmânî,” in G. de
Callataÿ, B. Van den Abeele eds.,
Une lumière venue
d’ailleurs. Héritages et ouvertures dans les
encyclopédies d’Orient et d’Occident au Moyen Age,
Actes du colloque de Louvain-la-Neuve, 19-21 mai 2005
,
Louvain-la-Neuve: Brepols, pp. 31–47.
–––, 2009, “Le monde végétal
dans la Râhat al-‘aql de Hamîd al-Dîn
al-Kirmânî et l'influence des Ikhwân
al-Safâ’,” in A. Paravicini Bagliani ed.,
Le
monde végétal. Médicine, botanique,
symbolique
, Tavernuzze-Impruneta (Firenze): SISMEL-Edizioni del
Galluzzo, pp. 63–75.
–––, 2010b, “La science des pierres
précieuses dans l'Épître des Ikhwân
al-Safâ’: entre les catalogues encyclopédiques et
le commentaire philosophique,” in J. Thomasset, J. Ducos,
J.-P. Chambon eds.,
Aux origines de la géologie de
l’Antiquité au Moyen Âge, Actes du Colloque
International 10–12 mars 2005, Paris Sorbonne (Paris IV)
,
Paris: Honoré Champion, pp. 75–90.
–––, 2011a, “
Ibdâ‘
,
Divine Imperative and Prophecy in the
Rasâ’il
Ikhwân al-Safâ’
,” in O. Ali-de-Unzaga ed.,
Fortesses of the Intellect. Ismaili and Other Islamic Studies in
Honour of Farhad Daftary
, London-New York: I.B. Tauris Publishers
in Association with the Institute of the Ismaili Studies, pp.
213–226.
–––, 2011b, “Eléments platoniciens
et néo-platoniciens de la représentation d'Adam dans la
Jâmi'a al-Jâmi'a
,” in P. Arfé et al.
ed.,
Adorare coelestia, gubernare terrena. International
conference in honour of Paolo Lucentini, Naples 6–7 november
2007,
(Instrumenta Patristica et medievalia, 58), Brepols:
Turnhout, pp. 99–111.
–––, 2012, “La figure d'Adam dans la
Jâmi'a al-Jâmi'a
,” in A. Paravicini
Bagliani ed.,
Adam, le premier homme
, Tavernuzze –
Impruneta (Firenze): SISMEL – Edizioni del Galluzzo, pp.
115–134.
–––, 2013b, “Le Role of the Divine
Imperative (
amr
) in the Ikhwân al-Safâ’ and
Related Works,”
Ishraq. Edjegodnik islamskoj filosofii
(Moskva), 4: 46–70.
–––, 2013c, “Nâsir-i Khosrow,
translator of the Ikhwân al-Safâ’?,” in V.
Klemm et al. ed.,
Sources and Approaches across Disciplines in
Near Eastern Studies
Proceedings of the 24th Congress, Union
Européenne des Arabisants et des Islamisants, (Orientalia
Lovaniensia Analecta, 215), Leuven – Paris – Walpole, MA:
Peeters en Departement Oosterse Studies, pp. 319–331.
–––, 2013d, “The Terms
Ibdâ‘
,
al-Mubda' al-Awwal
, and
Mubda'ât
in the
Rasâ'il Ikhwân
al-Safâ’
,” in P. Fodor et al. eds.,
More Modoque. Die Wurzeln der europaischen Kultur und deren
Rezeption im Orient und Okzident. Festschrift fur Miklos Maroth zum
siebzigsten Guburtstag
, Budapest: Forschungen fur
Humanwissenschaften der Ungarischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, pp.
293–311.
–––, 2014, “Epistle 48 of the Ikhwân
al-Safâ’ and their Ismâ'îli Commitment,”
in I. Lindstedt et al. ed.,
Case Studies in Transmission
,
(The Intellectual Heritage of Ancient and Mediaeval Near East, 1),
Münster: Ugarit Verlag, pp. 11–21.
–––, 2016, “Esoteric Shî‘ism
in the Additions to Ancient Manuscripts of the Rasâ’il
Ikhwân al-Safâ’,” in M.A. Amir-Moezzi et al.
ed.,
L’Ésotérisme shi‘ite, ses racines et
ses prolongements
, Turnhout: Brepols, pp. 281–326.
–––, 2018, “Embryology in an
Ismā‘īlī Messianic Context. The Manuscript
Tradition of the Iḫwān al-Ṣafā’,”
Studia graeco-arabica
, 8: 167–179.
–––, 2019a, “Ismâ‘îli
Onto-Cosmological Doctrines in the Manuscript Tradition of the
Iḫwân al-Safâ’,”
Shii Studies
Review
, 3: 33–58.
–––, 2019b, “L’astrologia politica
islamica: il caso degli Ikhwān al-Ṣafā’,”
in M. Benedetto, P. Arfé and P. Porro eds.,
Stars, Kingdoms,
Beliefs, and Masses. Political Astrology in the Mediterranean Area
from the Middle Ages to the Renaissance
/
Le stelle, i regni,
le credenze e le masse. L’astrologia politica nel Mediterraneo
fra Medioevo e Rinascimento
, monographic issue of
Quaestio,
Annuario di storia della metafisica / Annuaire d’histoire de la
metaphysique / Jahrbuch fur die Geschichte der Metaphysik / Yearbook
of the History of Metaphysics
, 19: 33–49.
–––, 2019c, “Onto-cosmology and
Hierohistory in the Manuscript Tradition of the
Rasâ’il
Ikhwân al-Safâ’
,” in O. Mir-Kasimov ed.,
Intellectual Interactions in the Islamic World: The
Ismâ‘îli Thread
. London: I.B. Tauris in
association with The Institute of Ismaili Studies, pp.
193–218.
–––, 2019d, “The Three Kinds of Rituals in
Epistle 50 of the Ikhwān al-Ṣafā’,” in A.
Pellitteri et al. eds.,
Re-defining a Space of Encounter. Islam and
Mediterranean: Identity, Alterity and Interactions
,
Proceedings
of the 28th Congress of the Union Europeenne des Arabisants et
Islamisants, Palermo 2016
(Orientalia Lovaniensia Analecta 283),
Leuven: Peeters, pp. 405–414.
–––, 2020a, “Ikhwân
al-Safâ’, Encyclopedia of”, in H. Lagerlund ed.,
Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy, Dordrecht: Springer, online
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-024-1665-7_238.
–––, 2020b, “The ‘Language of
God’ in Muslim and Jewish Traditions: A Case Study,” in C.
Ferrini ed.,
Human Diversity in Context
, Trieste: EUT Edizioni
Università di Trieste, pp. 121–142.
Bausani, A., 1977, Review of S. Diwald,
Arabische Philosophie
und Wissenschaft in der Enzyklopädie Kitâb
Iḫwân aṣ-Safâ’ (III): Die Lehre von
Seele und Intellekt
.
Rivista degli Studi Orientali
, 51:
322–326.
–––, 1978,
L’enciclopedia dei
Fratelli della Purità. Riassunto, con Introduzione e breve
commento, dei 52 Trattati o Epistole degli Ikhwân
as-safa’
, Napoli: Istituto Universitario Orientale.
–––, 1985, “L’enciclopedia e il
mondo arabo-islamico medievale,”
Rivista di Storia della
Filosofia
, 1: 137–146.
de Callataÿ, G., 2005,
Ikhwân
al-Safa’.
A Brotherhood of Idealists on the Fringe
of Orthodox Islam
, Oxford: Oneworld.
–––, 2008,
World Cycles and Geological
Changes According to the Brethern of Purity
, in P. Adamson
ed.,
In the Age of al-Fârâbî: Arabic
Philosophy in the Fourth/Tenth Century
, London – Turin: The
Warburg Institute – Nino Aragno Editore, pp. 179–193.
–––, 2014, “Philosophy and
Bāṭinism in al-Andalus: Ibn Masarra’s Risālat
al-I‘tibār and the Rasā’il Ikhwān
al-ṣafā’,”
Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and
Islam
, 41: 261–312.
de Callataÿ, G., Moureau, S., 2015, “Towards the
critical edition of the Rutbat al-ḥakîm: A few preliminary
observations,”
Arabica
, 62: 385–394.
–––, 2017, “A Milestone in the History of
Andalusî Bâṭinism: Maslama b. Qâsim
al-Qurtubî’s
Riḥla
in the
East,”
Histories of Books in the Islamicate World
, 5:
86–117.
Carusi, P., 2000, “Le traité alchimique
Rutbat
al-hakîm
. Quelques notes sur son introduction,”
Appendix to “Alchimia islamica e religione: la legittimazione
difficile di una scienza della natura,” in C. Baffioni
ed.,
Religion versus Science in Islam: a Medieval and Modern
Debate
,
Oriente Moderno
, 80: 491–502.
Casanova, P., 1915, “Une date astronomique dans les
Epîtres des Ikhwân as-Safa’,”
Journal
Asiatique
, 5: 5–17.
Corbin, H., 1950, “Rituel sabéen et
exégèse du rituel,”
Eranos Jahrbuch
, 19:
181–246.
–––, 1964,
Histoire de la philosophie
islamique, I. Des origines jusqu’à la mort
d’Averroës
, avec la collaboration de Seyyed
Hosseïn Nasr et Osman Yahya, Paris: Gallimard.
Daftary, F., 1998,
A Short History of the
Ismâ‘îlis
, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University
Press.
–––, 2004,
Ismâ‘îli
Literature
, London: Tauris in Association with the Institute of
Ismaili Studies.
–––, 2007,
The
Ismâ‘îlis. Their history and doctrines
, second
edition, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
D’Ancona Costa, C., 1996,
La casa della sapienza. La
trasmissione della metafisica greca e la formazione della filosofia
araba
, Milano: Guerini e Associati.
Darraz, Muhd Abdallah, 2012, “Islamic eco-cosmology in
Ikhwân al-Safâ’s view,”
Indonesian Journal
of Islam and Muslim Societies
, 2(1): 133–161.
De Smet, D., 1999, “Le soleil, roi du ciel, dans la
théologie astrale des Frères de la Pureté
(Ihwân as-Safâ’),” in
Le ciel dans les
civilisations orientales – Heaven in the Oriental
civilizations
,
Acta Orientalia Belgica
, 12:
151–160.
De Smet, D., 2017, “L’auteur des
Rasâ’il Ikhwân al-Safâ’
selon les
sources ismaeliennes ṭayyibites,”
Shii Studies
Review
, 1: 151–166.
El-Bizri, Nader, ed., 2008,
The Ikhwân
al-Safâ’ and their Rasâ’il
, New York:
Oxford University Press in Association with the Institute of Ismaili
Studies.
Farhan, Mohammed Jalub, 1999, “Philosophy of mathematics of
Ikhwân al-Safa [sic],”
Journal of Islamic Science
[Aligarh], 15(1–2): 25–53.
Fierro, M., 1996, “Bâtinism in al-Andalus. Maslama b.
Qâsim al-Qurtubî (d.353/964), author of the Rutbat
al-Hakîm and the Ghâyat al-Hakîm
(Picatrix),”
Studia Islamica
, 84(2):
87–109.
Gobillot, G., 2013, “L'éthique des Ikhwân
al-Safâ’ dans son rapport au Coran,” in M.A.
Amir-Moezzi ed.,
Islam: identité et altérité.
Hommage à Guy Monnôt, o.p.
, Brepols: Turnhout, pp.
197–245.
Goldziher, I., 1910, “Über die Benennung der
”Ichwan al-safa“,”
Der Islam
, 1:
22–26.
Hamdani, Abbas, 1978, “Abu Hayyan al-Tawhidi and the
Brethren of Purity,”
International Journal of Middle Eastern
Studies
, 9(3): 345–353.
–––, 1979, “An Early Fatimid source on the
time and authorship of the
Rasâ’il Ikhwân
al-Safâ’
,”
Arabica
, 26: 62–75.
–––, 1996, “A Critique of Paul Casanova's
Dating of the
Rasâ’il Ikhwân
al-Safâ’
,” in F. Daftary ed.,
Medieval
Isma‘ili History and Thought
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, pp. 145–152.
–––, 1999, “Brethren of Purity, a Secret
Society for the Establishment of the Fatimid Caliphate: New Evidence
for the Early Dating of their Enciclopædia,” in M.
Barrucand ed.,
L’Egypte fatimide son art et son
histoire
, M. Barrucand (ed.), Paris: Presses de
l’Université Paris-Sorbonne, pp. 73–82.
–––, 2008,
The Arrangement of the
Rasâ’il Ikhwân al-Safâ’ and the Problem
of Interpolations
, in N. El-Bizri ed.,
The Ikhwân
al-Safâ’ and their Rasâ’il
, New York:
Oxford University Press in Association with the Institute of Ismaili
Studies, pp. 83–100.
Heck, P.L., 2008,
Doubts about the Religious Community (Milla)
in al-Fârâbî and the Brethren of Purity
, in P.
Adamson ed.,
In the Age of al-Fârâbî: Arabic
Philosophy in the Fourth/Tenth Century
, London-Turin: The Warburg
Institute-Nino Aragno Editore, pp. 195–213.
Hijab, Muhammad Farid, 1982,
Al-falsafa al-siyasiyya
‘inda Ikhwân al-Safâ’
, s.l.:
Al-hay’a al-misriyya al-‘amma li ’l-kitab.
Kacimi, M., 2015, “Reflexiones sobre la relación de
la Risâlat ǧâmi‘at al-ǧâmi‘a
con los Iḫwân al-Safâ’,”
eHumanista/IVITRA
, 8: 328–338.
–––, 2016, “The Sufi thought in the
Rasa’il Ihwan al-Safa’,”
Med/Trans
, 4:
1–13.
–––, 2017, “El pensamiento
baṭinî
en al-Andalus: reflexiones a partir de la
Rutbat al-ḥakîm
y la
Gâyat
al-ḥakîm
(s. IV H./X E.C.),”
Estudios sobre
patrimonio, cultura y ciencias medievales
, 19: 729–752.
–––, 2019, “Los
Ijwân
al-safâ’
contra el estado
abasí. Acción política en relación con los
diversos estados de su época,”
Al-Qantara: Revista de
Estudios Árabes
, 40(2): 355–384.
Kraemer, J. L., 1986,
Philosophy in the Renaissance of Islam.
Abû Sulaymân al-Sijistânî and his Circle
,
Leiden: Brill.
–––, 1987, “The jihad of the
falasifa,”
Jerusalem Studies in Arabic and Islam
, 10:
288–324.
–––, 1992,
Humanism in the Renaissance of
Islam. The Cultural Revival during the Buyid Age
, Leiden-New
York-Köln: Brill.
Kraus, P., 1986,
Jabir ibn Hayyan. Contribution à
l’histoire des idées scientifiques dans l’Islam.
Jabir et la science grecque
, Paris: Les Belles Lettres (anast.
repr.).
Lewis, B., 1943, “An Epistle on Manual Crafts,”
Islamic Culture
, 17: 141–151.
Madelung, W., 2018, “Maslama al-Qurtubî’s
Contribution to the Shaping of the Encyclo­pedia of the
Ikhwân al-Safâ’,” in A. Straface et al. ed.,
Labor limae. Atti in onore di Carmela Baffioni
, Prefazione di
W. Madelung.
Studi Magrebini
(n.s.), 12–13 (2014–2015),
Tomo I, pp. 403–417.
Madelung in print, “The Fatimid Attitude toward the Umayyad
Caliphate as Reflected in the Sermons of Abū ‘Abd
Allâh al-Shî‘î and the Attitude of the
Ikhwân al-Safâ’”. Paper presented at the
International Conference “Fatimids and Umayyads: Competing
Caliphates”, London, The Institute of Ismaili Studies, 23–25
September 2016.
Marquet, Y., 1961, “La place du travail dans la
hiérarchie isma‘ílienne d’après
L’encyclopédie des Frères de la
Pureté
,”
Arabica
, 8: 225–237.
–––, 1962, “Imamat, resurrection et
hiérarchie selon les Ikhwan as-Safa,”
Revue des
Etudes islamiques
, 30: 49–142.
–––, 1966, “Sabéens et Ihwan
al-Safâ’,”
Studia Islamica
, 24: 35–80.
–––, 1967, “Sabéens et Ihwan
al-Safâ’,”
Studia Islamica
, 25:
77–109.
–––, 1968, “Ikhwân
al-Safâ,” in
Encyclopedia of Islam
, New Edition,
III, Leiden: Brill, 1071–1076.
–––, 1972, “Les cycles de la
souveraineté selon les épîtres des
Iḫwân al-Safâ’,”
Studia Islamica
,
36: 47–69.
–––, 1973,
La philosophie des Ihwan
as-Safâ’: l’imâm et la
société
, (Travaux et documents N° 1), Dakar:
Université de Dakar, Faculté des Lettres et Sciences
Humaines, Departement d’arabe.
–––, 1975,
La philosophie des Ihwan
al-Safa'
, Alger: Etudes et Documents.
–––, 1977, “Ihwân
al-safâ’, Ismaïliens et Qarmates,”
Arabica
, 24: 233–257.
–––, 1981, “Les Ihwan al-Safâ’
et l'Ismaïlisme,” in
Convegno sugli Ihwan
al-Safa'
, Roma: Accademia nazionale dei Lincei,
pp. 69–96.
–––, 1985, “Les Épîtres des
Ikhwân as-Safâ’, œuvre
ismaïlienne,”
Studia Islamica
, 61: 57–79.
–––, 1988,
La philosophie des alchimistes et
l’alchimie des philosophes. Jâbir ibn Hayyân et les
«Frères de la Pureté»
, Paris:
Maisonneuve et Larose.
–––, 1992, “La détermination
astrale de l’évolution selon les Frères de la
Pureté,”
Bulletin des Études Orientales
(
Damas
), 44: 127–146.
–––, 1998, “La réponse
ismaïlienne au schisme qarmate,”
Arabica
, 45:
1–21.
Massignon, L., 1913, “Sur la date de la composition des
»Rasâïl Ikhwân al Safa«,”
Der
Islam
, 4: 324.
Mattila, J., 2016, “The philosophical worship of the
Ikhwân al-Safâ’,”
Journal of Islamic
Studies
, 27: 17–38.
Maukola, I., 2009, “Creation in miniature: varieties on the
microcosm in the Rasâ'il Ikhwân
al-Safâ’,”
Studia Orientalia
, 107:
229–256.
Michot, Y.J., 2008,
Misled and Misleading... Yet Central in
their Influence: Ibn Taymiyya’s Views on the Ikhwân
al-Safâ’
, in N. El-Bizri ed.,
The
Ikhwân al-Safâ’ and their Rasâ’il
,
New York: Oxford University Press in Association with the Institute of
Ismaili Studies, pp. 139–179.
Nagy, A., 1897,
Die philosophischen Abhandlungen des
Ja‘qūb ben Ishāq al-Kindī
, Münster:
Aschendorffschen Buchhandlung.
Netton, I.R., 1989,
Allah Transcendent. Studies in the
Structure and Semiotics of Islamic Philosophy, Theology and
Cosmology
, Richmond: Curzon Press.
–––, 1991,
Muslim Neoplatonists. An
Introduction to the Thought of the Brethren of Purity
, Edinburgh:
Edinburgh University Press.
–––, 1996, “Foreign Influences and
Recurring Ismâ‘îli Motifs in
Rasâ’il
of the Brethren of Purity,” in 
I.R. Netton,
Seek Knowledge: Thought and Travel in the House of
Islam
, London – New York: Routledge Curzon, pp.
27–41.
–––, 2009, “Private caves and public
islands,” in M. Elkaisy-Freimuth, J.M. Dillon eds.,
The
afterlife of the Platonic soul: reflections of Platonic psychology in
the monotheistic religions
, Leiden – Boston: Brill,
pp. 107–120.
Nokso-Koivisto, I., 2011, “Summarized beauty: the
microcosm-macrocosm analogy and Islamic aesthetic,”
Studia
Orientalia
, 111: 251–269.
Poonawala, I., 2015, “Wealth and poverty in the Qur’an
and traditions of the prophet, and how those concepts are reflected in
the Rasā’il Ikhwān al-Safa’,”
Journal
of Shi‘a Islamic Studies
, 8(3): 263–287.
Raymond, H., 2014, “Le tribunal des animaux en Islam (IVe-Xe
siècle),”
Arabica
, 61(1–2):
116–152.
Reymond, P.-L., 2011, “La question de la mentalité
à travers la démarche des Ihwân
al-Safâ’ dans la 17e nuit du
Kitâb
al-Imtâ‘ wa-l-mu‘ânasa
d'Abû
Hayyân al-Tawhîdî,”
Bulletin d'Etudes
Orientales
, 60: 123–144; summaries in French, Arabic and
English on pp. 319–320.
Rudolph, U., 2005,
Islamische Philosophie. Von den
Anfängen bis zur Gegenwart
, München: Beck.
Saccone, C., 2007, “Il «retto sentiero»
(“sirât mustaqîm”) e la via
dell’intelletto: sapienza umana e sapienza divina
nell’Islam,”
Divus Thomas
, 110(3):
37–75.
Saif, L., 2019, “Ikhwān
al-Ṣafā’’s religious reform and magic: beyond
the Isma‘ili hypothesis,”
Journal of Islamic
Studies
, 30(1): 34–68.
–––,  2020, “A Study of the
Ikhwān al-Ṣafā’’s Epistle on Magic, the
Longer Version (52b),” in L. Saif et al. eds.,
Islamicate Occult Sciences in Theory and Practice
, Leiden:
Brill, pp. 162–206.
Stern, S.M., 1946, “The authorship of the Epistles of the
Ikhwan-as-Safa,”
Islamic Culture
, 20: 367–372.
–––, 1964, “New information about the
authors of the ‘Epistles of the Sincere Brethren’,”
Islamic Studies
, 3: 405–428.
Stroumsa, S., 2003, “Philosopher-king or
philosopher-courtier? Theory and reality in the
falâsifa
's place in Islamic society,” in C. de la
Puente ed.,
Identidades marginales
, (Estudios
onomástico-biográficos de al-Andalus, XIII), Madrid:
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas, pp.
433–459.
Tâmir, ‘Arif, 1983/1403H.,
Ibn Sînâ
fî marâbi‘ Ikhwân al-Safâ’
,
Beirut: Mu’assasa ‘Izz al-Dîn li
’-Tibâ‘a wa ’l-nashr.
Tibawi, A.L., 1955, “Ikhwân as-Safa and their
Rasâ’il
. A Critical Review of a Century and a
Half of Research,”
Islamic Quarterly
, 2:
28–46.
–––, 1978, “Further studies on
Ikhwân as-Safa,”
Islamic Quarterly
,
(20–22): 57–67.
de Vaulx d’Arcy, G., 2016,
Les Épîtres des
Frères en Pureté (Rasâ’il Iḫwân
aṣ-ṣafâ) une pensée de la totalité.
Etablissement de la paternité historique et commentaire
philosophique de l’ouvrage
, 2 vols. Thèse
dirigée par M. Rashed, Doctorat de Philosophie,
Université Paris IV – Sorbonne École doctorale V
(Concepts et langage), soutenue le 19 novembre 2016.
–––, 2019b, “
La
17
e
nuit d’at-Tawhîdî.
Réfutation d’une hérésie
menaçante, les
Épîtres des Frères
en Pureté”.
Revue des mondes musulmans et de la
Méditerranee
, 146, consulted on line at
http://journals.openedition.org/remmm/13122.
Vernet Ginés, J., 1990, “Las obras biológicas
de Aristóteles en árabe: el evolucionismo en Ibn
Jaldun,” in A. Martínez Lorca ed.,
Ensayos sobre la
filosofía en al-Andalus
, Barcelona: Editorial Anthropos,
pp. 187–193.
Yasien Mohamed, 2006, “The classical Islamic concept of work
and the craft,”
Journal for Semitics: Tydskrif vir
Semitistiek
, 15(1): 130–145.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Islamic Philosophy Online
Ikhwân al-Safâ’
, 
  entry by Ian R. Netton, in
Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy
.
Ikhwân al-Safâ’
,
 entry by Diana Steigerwald in the
Internet Encyclopedia of
Philosophy
The Rasail Ikhwan as-Safa
,
 at Ismaili.NET
Related Entries
al-Farabi
|
al-Kindi
|
al-razi
|
arabic-islamic-prophecy
|
Arabic and Islamic Philosophy, disciplines in: natural philosophy and natural science
|
Arabic and Islamic Philosophy, historical and methodological topics in: Greek sources
|
creation and conservation
|
Neoplatonism
|
Pythagoreanism
|
soul, ancient theories of