Influence of Arabic and Islamic Philosophy on Judaic Thought
First published Mon Dec 10, 2007; substantive revision Fri May 6, 2016
The ‘influence’ of Arabic and Islamic philosophy on Judaic
thought has never been studied as a whole: as a matter of fact, in
recent times it has not yet been the object of a comprehensive and
detailed analysis, apart from that made in a general article (Zonta
1997a; see also a wide table and a short sketch of the
Arabic-to-Hebrew philosophical works: Zonta 2011b and 2011c). That
article concentrated on some particular subjects of this
‘influence’, i.e. on the quotations, translations and
interpretations of the texts written by some Arab-Islamic philosophers
(the Brethren of Purity, Avicenna, and Averroes), but did not include
other authors, as al-Kindi, al-Ghazali or Ibn Bajja, nor some minor
figures which left some traces in Medieval Jewish philosophy. Of
course, the question of the general ‘influence’ of
Arab-Islamic philosophers on prominent authors as Ibn Gabirol and
Maimonides has been examined in specific articles and parts of books
(see in particular Pessin 2007, Davidson 2011, Pessin 2013). However,
this has not happened in the case of other Jewish authors, although a
number of more or less explicit or implicit references to Medieval
Arabic and Islamic philosophy have been found by modern scholars in
many Jewish authors, active in the period 900–1500: among the
most well-known of them, are Jacob al-Qirqisani, Isaac Israeli,
Solomon Ibn Gabirol, Bahya Ibn Paquda, Abraham bar Hiyya, Joseph Ibn
Zaddik, Moses Ibn Ezra, Judah Halevi, Abraham Ibn Daud, Moses
Maimonides, Samuel Ibn Tibbon, Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera, Levi ben
Gershom (Gersonides), Moses Narboni, and Hasdai Crescas. Usually, the
discovery of these references has not driven modern scholars to arrive
at even tentative conclusions about the real extent of this
‘influence’ and the ways of its spreading among Jewish
authors, apart from some particular cases – for example, that of
Arabic sources of 14
th
-century Jewish logic in Provence
(see Zonta 1997b).
Due to the complexity of the theme and the substantial shortage of
previous works especially and systematically devoted to it, a
comprehensive, if not detailed, analysis of the
‘influence’ of Arabic and Islamic philosophy on Judaic
thought should observe some limits. The concept of
“influence” in itself should be restricted to the cases
where a direct and evident, if not necessarily explicit, employment of
Arabic and Islamic sources by Jewish authors has been or can be
clearly ascertained. (For example, it is well-known that Maimonides
directly knew and employed a number of Arabic philosophical sources;
however, it should be admitted that, in many cases, Late Medieval
Jewish authors knew and employed these sources not directly, but
through Maimonides.) This analysis should not limit itself to the
cases when the text (or the texts) of an author were merely
“translated” into Hebrew or literally quoted in their
Arabic originals. These cases have been studied in some books
(Steinschneider 1893, Zonta 1996) and in a number of recent articles,
but such analysis should now spread to the cases where these texts
were commented on and in some cases directly and actually employed by
Jewish thinkers for building up their own philosophy. (In that regard,
it should be noted that many Late Medieval Jewish philosophers seem to
have known Avicenna’s philosophy; in reality, some of them might
have known it not directly, but mostly through al-Ghazali – as
might have happened even in the case of Maimonides too.) A historical
examination of this influence should proceed not according to the main
lines of the history of Jewish philosophy, but according to the
chronological order of the various Arabic and Islamic philosophers who
were read by Jewish authors, either in their original texts, or in
Medieval Hebrew translations, or in some cases even in Medieval Latin
versions – and it should be clear that Jewish philosophers
apparently did not employ as sources Arabic authors active after 1200
circa. Such examination should consider that “Arabic
philosophy” and “Islamic philosophy” cannot be
totally identified, but their relationship appears at times to be just
like the intersection of two not completely identical concepts. (For
example, some major works of Islamic philosophy like Avicenna’s
The Book of Science
[
Danesh name
], were written in
Persian, while there were some Medieval Christian philosophers active
in the Near East who wrote their works in Arabic, and who should
better be put among the cases of “influence of
[Christian-]Arabic philosophy on Judaic thought”.)
1. al-Kindi
2. Abu Bakr al-Razi
3. The Brethren of Purity (Ikhwan al-Safa) and Their Followers
4. al-Farabi
5. Avicenna
6. al-Ghazali
7. Ibn Bajja
8. Ibn Tufayl
9. Averroes (Ibn Rushd) and Some of His Followers
10. Fakhr al-din al-Razi and Sihab al-din al-Suhrawardi
11. Christian Arabic Authors
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. al-Kindi
The traces of the ‘influence’ of al-Kindi (796-866) on
Medieval Judaic thought appear to have been rather scanty, apart from
some quotations and passages surely taken from his works, and from one
of them in particular; in any case they appeared to have been
substantially limited to the first period of it, when the influence of
Neoplatonism (or, better, of the first Arab-Islamic Aristotelianism,
where a key role was played by Plotinus and Proclus as interpreters of
metaphysics) shows to have been stronger. As a matter of fact, rather
than speaking of al-Kindi’s influence on Judaic thought, one
should speak of a sort of Jewish “Kindism” through the
influence of some of al-Kindi’s Arabic (in particular Christian
Arabic) followers (see below, 11).
The first traces of al-Kindi’s influence have been found in
Jacob al-Qirqisani, a Karaite Jewish author living in Mesopotamia
(where al-Kindi himself was living one century before) in the first
half of the 10
th
century. In al-Qirqisani’s main
published non-philosophical work, the
Book On the Lights and
On the Guard Towers
(
Kitab al-anwar wa-l-maraqib
), a
study of the legal parts of the Pentateuch, Georges Vajda identified
some passages of al-Kindi’s
Epistle On the Quiddity of the
Sleep and the Vision
(
Risala fi mahiyya al-nawm
wa-l-ru’ya
), who al-Qirqisani would have employed for his
description of the concept of “sleep” (Vajda
1941–1945, 115–122). Other traces of a philosophical work
by al-Kindi, his
Epistle On the Cause Producing Ebb and Flow
(
Risala fi l-‘illa al-fa‘ila li-l-madd
wa-l-jazr
), have been found by Bruno Chiesa in a passage about
the world’s creation in al-Qirqisani’s most important (and
still unpublished) theological-philosophical work, the
Book of
Gardens
(
Kitab al-riyad
), a study of the non-legal parts
of the Pentateuch (Chiesa 1989, 95). Of course, a complete analysis of
al-Qirqisani’s own “philosophy”, as found in the
latter work, is still needed, so that the real force of
al-Kindi’s influence on his thought can be evaluated.
After al-Qirqisani, other traces of al-Kindi’s philosophical
influence can be found in later Jewish thinkers. The most important of
them appears in Isaac Israeli, living in Egypt and Tunisia between ca.
850 and 950 (according to other scholars, between ca. 830 and 932).
One of Israeli’s main philosophical works, his
Book of
Definitions
(
Kitab al-hudud
), is substantially a Jewish
adaptation of al-Kindi’s work on the same subject, the
Epistle On Definitions and Descriptions of Things
(
Risala
fi hudud al-ashya’ wa-rusumiha
): Israeli adapted to the
Jewish readers and sometimes commented on a number of al-Kindi’s
own definitions of philosophical and theological terms – as it
has been shown by Samuel Miklos Stern (Altmann and Stern 1958,
3–78). Israeli’s employment of al-Kindi’s philosophy
for building his own philosophical work appears to be the most
relevant case of al-Kindi’s influence on Medieval Jewish
philosophy. A second case is that of Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera
(1225–1295 circa), a Spanish Jewish philosopher who wrote a
number of works by fitting quotations (translated into Hebrew and
occasionally adapted by him to his own use) from many Arabic sources:
in his
Balm for Sorrow
(
Seri ha-yagon
), he was
strongly influenced by, and inserted a number of quotations from,
al-Kindi’s
On the Way of Dispelling Worry
(
Fi hila
li-daf‘ al-ahzan
), as proved by a number of scholars
(Ritter and Walzer 1938 [1943], Klugman-Barkan 1971). Apart from these
two cases, only very scanty traces of the knowledge of
al-Kindi’s work have been found in Medieval Jewish philosophy:
one can mention a reference to al-Kindi’s zoology found in Moses
Ibn Ezra’s still unpublished philosophic-philological work, the
Treatise of the Garden On the Metaphorical and the True Meanings
(of the Bible)
(
Maqala al-hadiqa fi ma‘na l-majaz
wa-l-haqiqa
), written in Christian Spain around 1130 (see ms. of
Jerusalem, Jewish National and University Library, 8° 570, pages
206, line 8 – 207, line 7).
2. Abu Bakr al-Razi
The bad reputation of Abu Bakr al-Razi (850-925 circa) as a
“heterodox” and “unbelieving” philosopher of
Medieval Islam seems to have generally influenced most of the Medieval
Jewish authors, as it appears in particular in Maimonides. However,
this did not prevent some of them from quoting and employing some of
his works as sources for building their own thought.
As for Maimonides’ harsh judgement of al-Razi as a philosopher,
it was clearly based upon the knowledge of the general contents of his
metaphysics and theology as found in al-Razi’s
Book of
Divine Science
(
Kitab al-‘ilm al-ilahi
), as found
both in his
Guide of the Perplexed
(
Dalalat
al-ha’irin
) and in one of his letters to the
“official” translator of his work, Samuel Ibn Tibbon. In
the latter, he affirms that al-Razi’s book on
Divine
Science
is not useful, since al-Razi was only a physician (and
not a real philosopher) (Marx 1934–1935, 378; about the real
influence of Maimonides’ letter, see also Harvey 1992). In part
three, chapter 12, of the
Guide
, in a more explicit way he
affirms that al-Razi’s book is full of raving ideas and
ignorance: according to him, al-Razi thought that in human life there
is surely more evil than good, so that even the divine goodness should
be seriously questioned (Moses Maimonides 1963, 2:441–442).
Notwithstanding this, two other Jewish philosophers at least mentioned
al-Razi and employed some of his ideas. Moses Ibn Ezra, in chapter 5
of his
Treatise of the Garden
, quotes a passage of al-Razi
about motion and comments on it by affirming that al-Razi is contrary
to Aristotle’s opinion and supports Plato’s instead (see
ms. of Jerusalem, Jewish National and University Library, 8° 570,
page 51, lines 5–8). Abu l-Barakat Ibn Malka al-Baghdadi,
working in Baghdad around 1150, in his
Book about the Point of
View
(
Kitab al-mu‘tabar
) — mostly based upon
Avicenna’s philosophy and possibly written before the
author’s conversion to Islam – followed in some cases
al-Razi’s doctrines, in particular his idea of two different
ideas of time, “eternal time” and “created
one” (see Pines 1979, 151–153).
3. The Brethren of Purity (Ikhwan al-Safa) and Their Followers
The scientific-philosophical Arabo-Islamic encyclopedia bearing the
title
Epistles of the Brethren of Purity and of the Lovers of
Faith
(
Rasa’il ikhwan al-safa’ wa-khullan
al-wafa’
), which includes 52 treatises about
mathematical sciences, logic, physical sciences, metaphysics,
anthropology, and theology, had a relevant, although unexpected and
not usually studied influence on Medieval Judaic thought in the
11
th
-15
th
centuries in Spain and Provence, and
in Yemen as well.
According to a tradition, the encyclopedia, possibly written in the
Near East in the first half of the 9
th
century by a still
unknown author (maybe Abu-l Qasim Maslama al-Majriti, d. 964: see
Carusi 2000, 500–502), was known in Spain around 1050; as a
matter of fact, there might be some traces of its influence on Solomon
Ibn Gabirol (Avicebron, 1021–1058 or 1070), one of the most
well-known Medieval Jewish philosophers, living and working in
Andalusia in the first half of the 11
th
century. According
to Jacques Schlanger (see Schlanger 1968, 94–97), Ibn Gabirol
might have taken from the Brethren of Purity the correspondence
between the hierarchy of the beings and the series of the first ten
numbers, as well as the reference to the doctrine of some sages about
the necessity to “cultivate” our souls through the study
of celestial things. According to Georges Vajda (see Vajda 1947,
24–33), more relevant traces might be found in chapter two of
the
Introduction to the Duties of the Hearth
(
Hidaya ila
fara’id al-qulub
), written by the Spanish Jewish author
Bahya Ibn Paquda in the period 1050–1080, where there might be
some agreements with the Brethren’s cosmological doctrines, as
well as a very similar style in defending them. As a matter of fact,
both these cases do not prove a direct use of the Brethren’s
work by these two Jewish philosophers. The first sure traces of a
direct influence of the doctrines of the Brethren of Purity are found
in two works written in two different Spanish areas in Judaeo-Arabic
(the language of Jews living in Arabic countries) around 1130, and
possibly influencing each other: the
Book of Microcosm
(
Kitab al-‘alam al-sagir
) by Joseph Ibn Zaddiq (d.
1149), and the
Treatise of the Garden
by Moses Ibn Ezra. The
original text of the work by Joseph Ibn Zaddiq, a rabbinical judge
living in Cordoba, is lost, but an anonymous Medieval Hebrew
translation is still preserved in some manuscripts, and has been
published twice. It includes a number of evident but not literal
references to the doctrines of the Brethren of Purity (see Vajda
1949), and its relationship to them was implicitly admitted by the
author himself at the very beginning of his work, as follows:
“It seems to me that the way for arriving to this great and
terrible knowledge (i.e. that of theological truths) consists in
understanding the books written by the pure philosophers and the
divine sages” (Horovitz 1903, 3). Moreover, in his letter to
Samuel Ibn Tibbon Maimonides explicitely affirmed: “I have not
read Joseph Ibn Zaddiq’s
Microcosm
, but I know the
author, his value and the value of his book: surely he follows the
ideas of the Brethren of Purity” (Marx 1934–1935, 379)
– an affirmation which, according to Sarah Stroumsa, should be
interpreted as a substantial critique to Ibn Zaddiq’s
philosophical views (Stroumsa 1990). As for Moses Ibn Ezra, his
Treatise of the Garden
is clearly full of references to
passages and doctrines indirectly inspired by, and in some cases
literally taken from the Brethren of Purity. As recently shown by Paul
Fenton in his book about the contents of Ibn Ezra’s work (Fenton
1997; see also Fenton 1976, 297), the
Treatise of the Garden
includes at least thirty-six passages of the
Epistles of the
Brethren
of
Purity
, as well as a number of
cases where their influence appears to be rather evident. For example,
the Brethren of Purity clearly influenced Ibn Ezra’s doctrines
about the creation of the world from the First Intellect and the
procession of the beings from God to matter, about nature as a power
of the Universal Soul, as well as about man as a microcosm. In the
same period, even Abraham Ibn Ezra, the well-known Spanish Jewish
author and scientist active in Italy, France and England in the period
1140–1160, knew and employed the Brethren of Purity (see Jospe
1994, 46–48).
Possibly as a consequence of the diffusion of the above works, the
influence of the Brethren of Purity seems to have spread among a
number of Jewish philosophers working in Spain during the
13
th
century. In some cases, this influence passed through
other minor Arab-Islamic authors, whose work was well-known among
Spanish Jewish readers. The Spanish Islamic philosopher Ibn al-Sid
al-Batalyawsi (from Badajoz, d. 1127) wrote a sort of compendium of
the Brethren’s doctrines, the
Book of the Gardens
(
Kitab al-hada’iq
), which was widespread among Jewish
authors (Kaufmann 1880, 32–63) either in its original Arabic
text, or in its three Medieval Hebrew translations (written between
1200 and 1370: see Steinschneider 1893, 286–288; Richler 1977),
often under the title
Book of Intellectual Circles
(
Sefer
ha-‘agullot ha-re‘yoniyyot
); it was one of the direct
sources of a Spanish philosopher and kabbalist, Isaac Ibn Latif, who
spoke about the Brethren’s doctrine of the five degrees of soul
(vegetal, animal, human, sapiential, prophetical) in his Hebrew book
The Gate of Heavens
(
Sha‘ar ha-shamayim
),
written in the period 1230–1250 (see Heller-Wilensky 1967, 199).
Another anonymous work,
The
Balance
of
Speculations
(
Me’ozney ha-‘iyyunim
),
written in Hebrew (or in a Judaeo-Arabic lost original version) in
13
th
-century Spain, is full of passages about numerology,
cosmology, theology and natural sciences: some of them might have been
inspired by al-Batalyawsi’s compendium, but some others were
evidently taken from the
Epistle of the Brethren of Purity
,
in particular those concerning the essence of faith, mineralogy and
botany (Abrahamov 1995). Finally, it should be noted that the Brethren
of Purity were employed as a direct philosophical source by Shem Tov
Ibn Falaquera in a number of occasions. In his Neoplatonic
philosophical anthology,
The
Book
of
Degrees
(
Sefer ha-ma‘alot
), a Hebrew quotation
ascribed to a “sage” (did Falaquera know that the work was
made by al-Majriti?) is in reality a literal passage of the
Epistle of the Brethren of Purity
dealing with the
relationship between the Universal Soul and the particular souls.
Falaquera’s
The
Book
of
the
Seeker
(
Sefer ha-Mevaqqesh
), a sort of short popular
encyclopedia written in 1263, is full of quotations from most of the
Brethren’s treatises: these quotations deal with several themes,
like the difference between science and faith, some mathematical
questions, the principles of astronomy and music, the meaning of the
term “nature”, the doctrine of
anima mundi
, the
climates, as well as some doctrines about logic, meteorology, music
(about this point, see Shiloah 1968), astrology and natural sciences,
and even some moral tales. Also the Brethren’s scientific
doctrines exerted a considerable influence over
13
th
-century Jewish authors. In books three and four of his
bulky scientific-philosophical encyclopedia,
The
Opinions
of
the
Philosophers
(
De‘ot ha-filosofim
), written around 1270 and still
unpublished, Falaquera quotes a number of passages of the Brethren
concerning mineralogy and botany, where a sort of mixture of
Aristotelian doctrines and alchemy can be found. Falaquera’s
mineralogical doctrines should have directly influenced the treatment
of mineralogy in other Hebrew texts, written around 1300, in
particular in Gershom ben Solomon of Arles’
The Gate of
Heavens
and in an alchemical treatise falsely ascribed to an
Arabic author. Finally, the zoology and the mathematics of the
Brethren of Purity were employed by Qalonymos ben Qalonymos for
writing down his own Hebrew books on morals (
Epistle On
Animals
,
Iggeret ba‘aley hayyim
) and on
mathematics (
Book of Kings
,
Sefer ha-melakim
: see
Lévy 1996, 69).
The supposed connection between the
Epistle of the Brethren of
Purity
and the Ismailism should have suggested the adoption of
this work as one of the main sources of the so-called “Jewish
Ismailism” as found in Late Medieval Yemenite Judaism. This
“Jewish Ismailism” consisted in adapting to Judaism some
Ismaili doctrines about cosmology, prophecy, and hermeneutics (Kiener
1984). There are a number of cases showing that the Brethren of Purity
influenced some Yemenite Jewish philosophers and authors in the period
1150–1550 (Langermann 1996). For example, chapter two of the
Judaeo-Arabic theologic-philosophical work by Natanael Ibn al-Fayyumi,
the
Garden of Intellects
(
Bustan al-‘uqul
),
written in Yemen in 1165, includes a correspondence between numbers
1–10 and ten scientific and philosophical concepts (soul’s
faculties, senses, directions, bodily substances and parts, etc.) most
of which are identical to those listed by the Brethren of Purity. Some
traces of the Brethren’s doctrine of the procession of beings
from the First Intellect, as well as of their numerology, are found in
two Yemenite philosophical
midrashim
, i.e. Judaeo-Arabic
interpretations of Biblical texts, written in 1420–1430: the
Glad Learning
(
Midrash ha-hefez
) by Zerahyah
ha-Rofé (Yahya al-Tabib) and the
Lamp of Intellects
(
Siraj al-‘uqul
) by Hoter ben Solomon (Mansur ibn
Sulayman al-Dhamari) (see Blumenthal 2007).
4. al-Farabi
The ‘influence’ of the Arabic “second Master”
(i.e. the second Aristotle), Abu Nasr al-Farabi (870-950), is evident
in many fields of Medieval Jewish philosophy: epistemology, logic,
metaphysics and theology, ethics, and even physics.
As for epistemology, al-Farabi’s major work on it, the
Enumeration of Sciences
(
Ihsa’
al-‘ulum
), about the general contents of linguistics,
logic, mathematical sciences, physics and metaphysics, ethics and even
Islamic jurisprudence and religion, exerted an important influence
over a number of Jewish scholars in the period 1200–1400. Joseph
ben Judah Ibn ‘Aqnin (d. 1226), a Moroccan Jewish follower of
Maimonides, inserted long sections of the original Arabic text in
chapter 27 of his main ethical work,
The Medicine of Souls
(
Tibb al-nufus
); in his commentary on the
Song of
Songs
,
The
Revealing of Secrets
(
Inkishaf
al-asrar
), he quoted a number of other Farabian works on
epistemology, logic, metaphysics, and even music. Shem Tov Ibn
Falaquera inserted a number of its passages (in Hebrew) into his own
“enumeration of sciences”, part two of the
Beginning
of Science
(
Reshit hokhmah
), probably written around
1250 (Efros 1935; Strauss 1936; about Falaquera’s knowledge of
al-Farabi’s works, see Harvey 2002). Qalonymos ben Qalonymos
translated the whole work into Hebrew in 1314, together with another
short “introduction to Aristotle” by al-Farabi himself;
rather significantly, he himself inserted into it his own treatment of
some subjects which were lacking in the original Arabic text, very
probably since al-Farabi rejected them as real sciences: medicine,
alchemy, magic. Qalonymos’ version was later quoted by some
Jewish scholars, mainly during the 14
th
and 15
th
centuries. As far as philosophy in general is concerned, it should be
noted that Falaquera made a sort of complete Hebrew abridgement of
three main works by al-Farabi, and inserted them into part three of
the
Beginning of Science
: the
Attainment of
Happiness
(
Tahsil al-sa‘ada
), the
Philosophy
of Plato
(
Falsafa Aflatun
) and the
Philosophy of
Aristotle
(
Falsafa Aristu
), so spreading among Jews the
knowledge of the general contents of all works by Plato and Aristotle
(Strauss 1936; see also Mahdi 1962). Falaquera also quoted a short
introductory passage of al-Farabi’s
Epistle On the Knowledge
of Philosophy
in his
Book of Degrees
(as pointed out in
Chiesa and Rigo 1993).
As for logic, al-Farabi even exerted a stronger influence over
Medieval Jewish philosophy, which was apparently almost like that
exerted by the most highly reputed, “official” commentator
of Aristotelian logic: Averroes. According to Maimonides, there was no
need to study logical texts, apart from those by al-Farabi, since
“all that he wrote… is full of wisdom, and… he was
a very valid author” (Marx 1934–1935, 379). Surely,
al-Farabi’s logical (and also non-logical) works influenced the
Treatise On the Art of Logic
(
Maqala fi sina‘a
al-mantiq
) usually ascribed to Maimonides, and probably written
around 1160 (see Brague 1996; Maimonides’ authorship has been
recently challenged by Davidson 2005, 313–322): this text was
thrice translated into Hebrew in the 13
th
and
14
th
centuries and was obviously widespread among Jewish
readers in the Late Middle Ages. As a matter of fact, almost all his
logical works were either translated into Hebrew, or at least widely
employed by a number of Medieval Jewish philosophers in the
13
th
-15
th
centuries (among the others, by Samuel
Ibn Tibbon in his
Commentary on the Difficult Terms
[
Perush ha-millot ha-zarot
]: Robinson 2009), although the
real extent of his influence on Jewish logic has not yet been examined
in all its aspects. As for the many Hebrew translations of his
summaries or “short commentaries” on Porphyry’s
Isagoge
and Aristotle’s
Organon
, probably five
groups of these translations (not covering the whole series of the
summaries) can be identified: some translations were made very early,
possibly before 1200; some others should be ascribed to a Spanish Jew,
Moses Ibn Lagis; some others were made by members of the family of the
Ibn Tibbons, during the 13
th
century, and were often
employed as sources by some 14
th
- and
15
th
-centuries Jewish philosophers (Judah ben Isaac Cohen,
Abraham Avigdor); other translations consisted in revisions of the
Tibbonian ones, were made before 1320 and were surely known to
Hezekiah bar Halafta (see below, 7); finally, two translations (the
only ones of al-Farabi’s summaries of Aristotle’s
Rhetoric
and
Poetics
) were probably made by Todros
Todrosi, a philosophical translator working in Arles, around 1330
(about all these translations, see Zonta 1996, 189–193). In
particular, al-Farabi’s summary of the
Categories
was
quoted and commented on by an otherwise unknown Jewish philosopher,
Sar Shalom, possibly active in Provence around 1300 (Zonta 1997b,
523). Also some of al-Farabi’s “long commentaries”
(
tafasir
) on Aristotle’s logic, even those now lost in
their Arabic original text, can be shown to have influenced Jewish
philosophers: the
Long Commentary on Categories
is preserved
almost only due to the many quotations made by a Late Medieval Jewish
author, Judah ben Isaac Cohen, and has very recently been published
(Zonta 2006a); the
Long Commentary on De interpretatione
,
found in Arabic, was translated into Hebrew before 1334 (the text of
its introduction in Hebrew is still extant) and appears to have
influenced Gersonides too (Glasner 2002, 252–254); many passages
from the
Long Commentary on Book Eight of Topics
, lost in
Arabic, were translated into Hebrew by Todros Todrosi in 1334. As
proved by Georges Vajda (Vajda 1965), Maimonides knew and implicitely
employed al-Farabi’s summary of
Topics
, book one,
chapter 11, as a source of a passage of his
Guide of the
Perplexed
, part two, chapter 25, concerning a discussion between
the two different doctrines of the eternity of the world according to
Aristotle and Plato; he also knew and paraphrased some passages from
other logical works by al-Farabi (the summary of
De
interpretatione
, the
Long Commentary on Prior Analytics
:
see Davidson 2005, 113–114).
As for al-Farabi’s most famous work, the
Book of the
Opinions of the People of the Virtuous City
(
Kitab ara’
ahl al-madina al-fadila
), apart from some short quotations found
in Moses Ibn Ezra’s
Treatise of the Garden
(Fenton
1976, 297) and in Isaac Ibn Latif’s above mentioned work (Chiesa
1986, 80), the most relevant employment of this text as a source for
metaphysics and theology is found in Falaquera’s
Book of
Degrees
and in particular in book ten of his encyclopedia
The
Opinions of the Philosophers
, where his general treatment of the
nature of God mixed up al-Farabi’s and Averroes’ opinions
about it (Chiesa 1986, 81–84). Al-Farabi’s
Virtuous
City
appears to have been ignored by most of Medieval Jewish
philosophers: as a matter of fact, Moses Ibn Tibbon did not translate
it into Hebrew, but preferred to translate al-Farabi’s
The
Political Regimen
(
al-Siyasa al-madaniyya
) instead
(Steinschneider 1893, 290–292) – another Farabian text
known and quoted by Falaquera (Plessner 1956, 189–193).
According to Pines, although al-Farabi’s former work is not
explicitely quoted in the
Guide of the Perplexed
, it was
surely among the main sources of Maimonides’ doctrine about the
different roles played by the philosopher and by the prophet (see
Moses Maimonides 1962, 1:lxxxvii-xcii). Al-Farabi’s idea about
the relationship between philosophy and religion, according to which
the former is in a substantially higher position with respect to the
latter, as found in his
Book on Letters
(
Kitab
al-huruf
) and
Book on Religion
(
Kitab
al-milla
), strongly influenced Maimonides’ ideas about this
(see Berman 1974); moreover, the
Book on Letters
was later
employed as a source for Falaquera’s treatment of linguistics in
his
Beginning of Science
. According to Davidson, Maimonides
explicitly quoted and employed al-Farabi’s
Political
Regime
under the title
The Changing Beings
(
al-Mawjudat al-mutaghayyira
) for discussing the question of
the world’s eternity in part two, chapter 74, of the
Guide
(Davidson 2005, 113). It should be noted that European
Jewish philosophers active in the 13
th
and 14
th
centuries show even more interest in another work by al-Farabi: his
treatise
On the Intellect
(
Risala fi l-‘aql
).
This interest was apparently raised by Maimonides, who quoted and
commented on some passages of this book about the theologians’
idea of the human intellect and the role of the active intellect in
his
Guide
(see what has been written by Pines in Moses
Maimonides 1962, 1:lxxxii-lxxxiii). As recently shown by Gad
Freudenthal, at least three Arabic-into-Hebrew versions of the work
(one by Qalonymos ben Qalonymos, and two anonymous) were written, read
and in one case at least commented on in Western Europe between about
1150 and 1320 (Freudenthal 2003). Moreover, Farabian doctrines (if not
direct references to al-Farabi’s works) about some key concepts
of metaphysics and theology (the First Cause, the prophecy, etc.) were
still circulating in Spain around 1350 (see Vajda 1962, 216–217,
where these doctrines are found in Joseph Ibn Waqqar’s work).
As for ethics, the first traces of al-Farabi’s doctrine about
the difference between the philosophers and inferior classes of men
are found in Abraham bar Hiyya (Vajda 1938). However,
al-Farabi’s affirmation, as found in his lost commentary on
Aristotle’s
Nicomachean Ethics
, about human moral
perfection and its connection to an intellectual perfection apparently
limited to man’s life in this world seems to have influenced
Maimonides’ idea of perfection as found in part three, chapter
18, of the
Guide of the Perplexed
(Moses Maimonides 1962,
1:lxxix-lxxxii; Davidson 2005, 113). Other ethical works by al-Farabi,
the
Epistle of the Guide to the Way of Happiness
(
Risala
fi l-tanbih ‘ala sabil al-sa‘ada
) and the
Selected Aphorisms
(
Fusul muntaza‘a
), were
also both translated into Hebrew, probably around 1300, and quoted by
some Jewish philosophers: Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera (Plessner 1956,
179–183), Qalonymos ben Qalonymos, Josef Ibn ‘Aqnin
(Steinschneider 1893, 290–292).
According to Yair Shiffman, a lost work by al-Farabi on physics, his
Long Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics
, was also
implicitly quoted by Falaquera in his
Guide to the Guide
(
Moreh ha-Moreh
), a philosophical commentary on
Maimonides’
Guide
written in 1280 (Shem Tov Ibn
Falaquera 2001, 234); as a matter of fact, a passage of it about the
formal and material differences between the heavens and the stars is
explicitly quoted and commented on by Maimonides himself in chapter 19
of part two of the
Guide of the Perplexed
(see Moses
Maimonides 1962, 2:239).
5. Avicenna
The main reason for the interest of a number of Medieval Jewish
philosopher towards Avicenna (Ibn Sina, 980–1037) might have
been Avicenna’s own interest in a tentative conciliation between
Aristotelian philosophy and religion (see Harvey 2009). Such interest
was due to the philosopher’s special attitude towards Islam, and
towards Shi‘ite Islam in particular, an attitude which the
Avicennian Jewish philosophers obviously applied to Judaism. It seems
that these philosophers regarded Avicenna as a substantial defender of
religion over philosophy, so associating him with al-Ghazali’s
own position with regard to philosophy. In this way, “Jewish
Avicennism” was slowly absorbed into a sort of “Jewish
Ghazalism”, aiming at a defense of Judaism against Averroism
(see below, 6). However, according to a more recent, in-depth, and
wider examination of all the extant Judeo-Arabic and Hebrew materials
about Avicenna as philosopher, mystic, and physician in the Jewish
Middle Ages, it is evident that, among Jewish philosophical authors,
the ‘committed Avicennians’ were really few, while the
‘eclectic Avicennians’, who employed a number of more or
less Avicennian ideas, were very many – even if some of them did
not read Avicenna directly (Freudenthal and Zonta 2012).
Avicenna was the main source of an important doctrine which spread
among a number of 11
th
- and 12
th
-century Jewish
philosophers, as once shown by Harry A. Wolfson (Wolfson 1935):
according to this doctrine, there are in man’s mind five
internal senses (common sense, estimation, imagination, thought, and
memory). A first trace of this doctrine was found in Bahya Ibn Paquda:
however, he might have taken it from an Arabic philosophical or
theological compendium inspired by Avicenna. Such occasional
employment of Avicenna as a source for one particular point of a
Medieval Jewish philosopher’s thought might have happened in the
case of Joseph Ibn Zaddiq’s
Book of the Microcosm
, as
observed by Vajda in his study about the philosophical sources of the
latter (see Vajda 1949, 180). A more important case is that of the
well-known Spanish Jewish author Judah Halevi (1085–1141). In
his main Judaeo–Arabic work, the
Book of the Khazar
(in
Hebrew,
Sefer ha-Kuzari
), an explicit defence of Judaism with
respect to the other religions and to philosophy as well, he
significantly employed Avicenna’s
Epistle On the Soul
(
Risala fi l-nafs
) as a direct and literal, albeit implicit
source for his description of man’s soul in chapter 12 of book
five, as definitively shown by David H. Baneth (see his introduction
to Judah Halevi 1977). Also a more “mystical” work by
Avicenna,
Living Son of the Watchful
(
Hayy ibn
Yaqzan
), apparently inspired Abraham Ibn Ezra in writing his own
work in Hebrew on the same subject, the
Iggeret Hay ben
Meqits
(around 1150), as shown by Israel Levin (see Levin
1983).
In any case, a wider influence of Avicenna’s philosophy on
Medieval Judaic thought appeared after 1150. The first significant
case is that of Abraham Ibn Daud, living in Toledo between 1110 and
1180 circa. As it is clear from his philosophical work, the
Exalted Faith
(
al-‘Aqida al-rafi’a
, lost
in its Judaeo-Arabic original, but preserved in two
14
th
-century Hebrew translations), he was the first Jewish
Aristotelian, but surely employed as his main sources both Avicenna
and al-Ghazali. As shown in recent studies by Amira Eran, and in
particular in her book about the contents of Ibn Daud’s work
(Eran 1998, 27), Avicennian influences appear mostly in book one of
the
Exalted Faith
, where such philosophical themes as
categories, matter and motion, souls and celestial bodies are studied.
However, in treating these themes, Ibn Daud did not directly refer to
the contents of Avicenna’s main extant encyclopedia,
The
Cure
(
al-Shifa’
), but to his minor encyclopedia of
logic, physics and metaphysics:
The Salvation
(
al-Najat
). Moreover, it might be suggested that in reality
instead Ibn Daud employed al-Ghazali as his main source for
constructing his own “Avicennism” rather than Avicenna
himself (see below, 6), just as a number of later Medieval Jewish
philosophers did, beginning with Maimonides. Maimonides appears to
have regarded Avicenna not as a really direct and important
philosophical source. Although clear echoes of Avicennian doctrines
about the distinction between essence and existence, between necessary
and contingent beings, as well as the well-known Avicennian proof of
the existence of God, have been found in the
Guide of the
Perplexed
(see Moses Maimonides 1962, 1:xciii-ciii), the explicit
judgement of Maimonides about Avicenna’s thought appears to be
substantially cool (for a different interpretation of this judgement,
see however Dobbs-Weinstein 2002). In his letter to Samuel Ibn Tibbon,
he affirms that “Avicenna’s books, although they are
subtle and difficult, are not like those by al-Farabi; however, they
are useful, and he too is an author whose words should be studied and
understood” (Marx 1934–1935: 380).
Maimonides’ lukewarm judgement about Avicenna did not prevent
many later Jewish scholars from studying his works and employing them
as sources for their own philosophy. Even the translator of
Maimonides’
Guide
, Samuel Ibn Tibbon, directly referred
to Avicenna’s doctrines and affirmations about meteorology both
in his Hebrew translation (including some comments) of
Aristotle’s
Meteorology
, and in his work
Treatise
on “Waters Did Gather”
(
Ma’amar be-yiqqawu
ha-mayim
), as shown by Resianne Fontaine in her critical edition
and English translation of the former (Fontaine 1995); this Jewish
philosopher can be even tentatively seen as a ‘committed
Avicennian’. Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera, whose many works appear to
have been a sort of “basin of quotations”, referred to a
number of Avicenna’s philosophical works, and employed them as
sources for his own expositions of Maimonides’ and
Aristotle’s thought, in the
Guide to the Guide
and in
the
Opinions of the Philosophers
, as well as for some other
minor works. In particular, he quoted some passages from
The
Cure
about celestial bodies, mineralogy, zoology, psychology, and
metaphysics; he quoted a number of passages of
The Salvation
about logic and psychology; he made an abridgement of the contents of
the
Epistle On the Soul
; he even quoted short passages from
Avicenna’s
Remarks and Admonitions
(
al-Isharat
wa-l-tanbihat
); finally, Avicenna was probably one of the main
sources for Falaquera’s philosophical dictionary, put at the
beginning of the
Opinions of the Philosophers
, as well as for
his own classification of sciences in part two of the
Beginning of
Wisdom
. The influence of Avicenna on Jewish scientific thought
continued after 1300: for example, some traces of it are found also in
the Hebrew paraphrase of a pseudo-Avicennian work, made by a
Provençal Jewish scholar, Solomon ben Moses of Melgueil (d.
between 1306 and 1309) (see Glasner 1996).
Probably, an important case of eclectic “Jewish
Avicennism” appeared in 14
th
-century Provence and
Spain. Its main character was the employment of some aspects of
Avicenna’s philosophy in favor of the Jewish religious tradition
– although this aspects are not evidently employed against the
Aristotelian philosophical tradition as represented by Averroes’
rationalism. As a matter of fact, some of these eclectic “Jewish
Avicennians” tried to arrive at a substantial agreement between
Jewish religion and philosophy; some others might have had an opposite
effect, as happened for example in the case of Abner of Burgos.
Judah ben Solomon Natan, a physician and translator active in Provence
around 1330, explicitly declared the reason for his interest in
Avicenna in the introduction to his Hebrew translation of
al-Ghazali’s
Intentions of the Philosophers
(
Maqasid al-falasifa
), where he affirmed that he translated
that book since it was very useful for reconciling religious tradition
and philosophy, and he found a substantial correspondence between that
book and some parts of Avicenna’s
The Cure
about
physics and metaphysics, as well as Avicenna’s
The
Salvation
. Judah Natan’s translation was employed by his
friend Todros Todrosi for his own translation of the
“Avicennist” work
The Sources of Questions
(
‘Uyun al-masa’il
): in the introduction to the
latter, he affirms to have found there the same opinion expressed in
al-Ghazali’s above mentioned book. Here and in his philosophical
anthology (dating back to 1334) Todros quoted some of Avicenna’s
passages about logical, physical and metaphysical questions: he took
them both from the logical sections of
The Cure
(he also
quoted a passage about infinite motion from book three, chapter 8 of
the physical section of this work), and from Avicenna’s
Remarks and Admonitions
. Finally, he was the unique Medieval
Hebrew author who wrote an almost complete translation of one of
Avicenna’s philosophical works: books two and three of
The
Salvation
, about physics and metaphysics. Two other
Provençal Jewish authors employed Avicenna: Judah Cohen, who
might have been active in Provence around 1350, was apparently
inspired by Avicenna’s
Epistle On Love
(
Risala fi
l-‘ishq
) (Vajda 1977, 136); the well-known Jewish
philosopher and commentator of Averroes Moses Narboni, living there in
the period 1300–1360, occasionally quoted some passage from
The Cure
and
The Salvation
in his own
“Averroistic” commentary on the
Intentions of the
Philosophers
(Steinschneider 1893, 318). Various approaches to
Avicenna are found in 13
th
- and 14
th
-century
Spain: Avicenna’s metaphysics was the main source of Moses
ha-Levi’s
Metaphysical
(lit.
“divine”)
Treatise
(
Maqala ilahiyya
),
written in Judaeo-Arabic probably before 1300, whose contents were
studied in detail by Vajda (see Vajda 1948) – here there is one
of the few cases of ‘committed Avicennism’; the Jewish
philosopher Abner of Burgos (1270–1350 circa), both before and
after having converted to Christianity, seems to have often employed
Avicenna in favor of determinism and against Averroes (he claims to
have transmitted some lost passages of Avicenna’s
The
Oriental Wisdom
[
al-Hikma al-mashriqiyya
]; but see
Szpiech 2010); Josef Ibn Waqqar, in his
Treatise for Reconciling
Philosophy and Religious Law
(
Maqala al-jami‘a bayna
l-falsafa wa-l-shari‘a
), written in Judaeo-Arabic around
1360 and analyzed by Vajda, even tried to reconcile Averroes, Avicenna
and al-Ghazali in a very difficult field: metaphysics (Vajda 1962,
132). In a different, indirect way the Neoplatonic circle of Jewish
authors of Hebrew supercommentaries on Abraham Ibn Ezra’s
Biblical commentaries, active in Spain in the second half of the
14
th
century and in Provence in the first decades of the
15
th
century, could have employed Avicennian ideas for
defending the doctrine of astral determinism (see Schwartz 1996);
still indirectly, Avicenna’s thought might have influenced some
aspect of Hasdai Crescas’ philosophy (see below, 6). According
to Dov Schwartz, the role played by Avicenna in influencing some
aspects of 14
th
- and also 15
th
-century Judaic
thought was even more widespread than that played by Averroes, who was
until now regarded as the most important “master” in Late
Medieval Jewish philosophy after Maimonides (Schwartz 1995, 420).
6. al-Ghazali
Remarkably, there are clues that even the main representative of
Arab-Islamic Sunnite theology, al-Ghazali (1058-1111), exerted an
important ‘influence’ over some aspects of Medieval Jewish
philosophy and thought. This fact has not yet been systematically
studied and explained by scholars, but it cannot be easily neglected.
Moreover, in the 14
th
century there was apparently a sort
of “Jewish Ghazalism”, based upon al-Ghazali’s works
(both philosophical and theological ones), so that many aspects of his
thought as a typical Islamic thinker were curiously employed for
defending some similar aspects of Jewish religious tradition.
The first sure traces of an influence of al-Ghazali on Judaic thought
appeared rather early, around 1160, when Abraham Ibn Daud employed his
major philosophical work,
The Intentions of the Philosophers
,
as one of the main unavowed sources of his
Exalted Faith
(see
Eran 1998, 27). Significantly enough, al-Ghazali’s work
influenced not only the contents of book one of the
Exalted
Faith
, about some aspects of Aristotelian philosophy (logic,
physics, and metaphysics), but also book two of it, about theology
(God’s incorporeity, unity, attributes, as well as divine
creation, prophecy, and providence). Possibly, al-Ghazali might have
exerted a similar influence over Maimonides too, and over his
philosophical thought in particular. As a matter of fact, there are no
direct and explicit mentions of al-Ghazali either in the
Guide of
the Perplexed
or in Maimonides’ above mentioned letter to
Samuel Ibn Tibbon; but some traces of Avicennian doctrines in some of
Maimonides’ works (both in the
Guide
and in other ones)
could also be explained as the results of an influence of Avicenna by
means of al-Ghazali, and of the latter’s
Intentions of the
Philosophers
in particular, as pointed out by Herbert Davidson
and other scholars (Davidson 2005, 104; see also Pines 1971, 958; for
a particular case-study, see Eran 2001). Davidson, in particular,
affirms that “virtually every of a metaphysical character
attributed by Maimonides to Aristotle but actually deriving from
Avicenna was available to him through Ghazali”: according to
him, there are striking similarities, even in some points of the
phraseology, between Maimonides and al-Ghazali, about these points
(Davidson 2004, 732; see also Davidson 2005, 115).
Direct and explicit proofs of the influence of al-Ghazali on Medieval
Jewish philosophy appeared in Spain and Provence from 1270 onwards.
The first case is found in Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera’s
Book of
Degrees
, two passages of which were surely taken from the
Intentions of the Philosophers
(Chiesa 1986, 86). The second
and more important case is that of Isaac Albalag, a Catalan or
Provençal Jewish philosopher who first translated the work into
Hebrew, and then commented on it in his work
Correction of the
Opinions (of the Philosophers)
(
Tiqqun ha-de‘ot
),
written at the end of the 13
th
century. As shown by Vajda,
who published a critical edition of Albalag’s commentary and
studied its philosophical contents in detail (Vajda 1960, Yishaq
Albalag 1973), he did not employ al-Ghazali for defending him, but for
criticizing him instead: contrary to al-Ghazali, Albalag even seems to
have adopted the doctrine of the existence of two truths, the
philosophical one (reserved for wise and experienced philosophers) and
the religious one (reserved for common people). After Albalag, in the
first half of the 14
th
century al-Ghazali’s
Intentions
were translated into Hebrew in Provence twice: by
Judah Natan, who allegedly wrote this translation for refuting the
arguments of the “philosophists” (in Hebrew,
mitfalsefim
), i.e. the Averroists (see above, 5); and by an
anonymous translator, possibly identical to, or working for, Moses
Narboni. As a matter of fact, Narboni commented on the
Intentions
in a totally different, substantially Averroist
way (see Steinschneider 1893, 311–319). Other evident proofs of
the direct influence of al-Ghazali’s philosophical work on
14
th
-century Judaic thought are found in some Spanish
authors, active after 1350, for example in Moses ben Judah’s
philosophical encyclopedia,
The Love of (Intellectual)
Pleasures
(
Ahavah ba-ta‘anugim
), written in 1354
(Eisenmann 2000). In 15
th
-century Spain and even later,
many commentaries, mostly on the metaphysical section of the
Intentions
, were written by some philosophers (Isaac Ibn Shem
Tov, Eli Habillo, Moses Almosnino, and some anonymous authors): they
were identified by Steinschneider (Steinschneider 1893, 320–325)
but are still in need of a deeper study. This wide employment of
al-Ghazali’s work as a philosophical source might be explained
as an easier way to the knowledge of the general contents of
Aristotelian logic, physics, and metaphysics (see Harvey 2001).
However, al-Ghazali’s
Intentions
was not his only work
known and employed as a source by Late Medieval Jewish authors. They
were surely influenced by other two philosophical works by him about
logic:
The Balance of Knowledge
(
Mi‘yar
al-‘ilm
) and
The Touchstone of Intellect
(
Mihakk al-nazar
). Both were explicitly quoted by Todros
Todrosi in his philosophical anthology, and the first of them,
possibly translated into Hebrew before the end of the 15
th
century, was surely employed as a source by two Jewish philosophers,
Zerahyah Hen (active in Rome, 1277–1290) and Moses Narboni. Some
of these authors, mostly living in the Northern Spanish area, knew and
employed some of al-Ghazali’s ethical and even theological works
(see Steinschneider 1893, 328–330, 342–347): the
Balance of Actions
(
Mizan al-a‘mal
) was
translated into Hebrew by Abraham Ibn Hasdai of Barcelona around
1210–1230; the
Lamps of Lights
(
Mishkat
al-anwar
) was twice translated in the 14
th
century;
the
Incoherence of Philosophy
(
Tahafut al-falasifa
)
was translated before 1411 by Zerahyah ha-Levi Saladin –
probably, a member of the Catalan circle of Hasdai Crescas, who might
have employed al-Ghazali’s work as one of the undeclared sources
of his famous
Light of the Lord
(
Or Adonai
), a deep
critique of some key points of Aristotelian philosophy. (However, this
hypothesis has been criticized by Harry A. Wolfson: see Wolfson 1929a,
11–16.)
7. Ibn Bajja
A number of philosophical works by the Spanish Arabo-Islamic author
Abu Bakr Ibn Bajja (d. 1138), usually called “Ibn
al-Sa’igh” by the Jewish tradition, were known and
employed by Medieval Jewish philosophers.
The first of these philosophers who gives evidence of having been
’influenced’ by him is a well-known Jewish
fellow-countryman and contemporary, Judah Halevi: as shown by Shlomo
Pines (see Pines 1980, 210–217), in chapter 1 of book one of his
Book of the Khazar
he reflects not Avicenna’s
philosophy (as in another place of his work: see above, 5), rather Ibn
Bajja’s as expounded in his
Epistle On the Conjunction of
the Agent Intellect with Man
(
Risala al-ittisal
), and
gives a sort of summary of his main ideas about God and the world.
Maimonides had the highest esteem of Ibn Bajja: he affirmed that
“he was a great and wise philosopher, and all his works are
right and correct”, and possibly appreciated him as a
commentator of Aristotle too (Marx 1934–1935, 379). In some
cases he was surely influenced by Ibn Bajja’s thought: in the
Guide of the Perplexed
, he explicitly refers to some of his
philosophical and scientific ideas, and reveals in particular the
influence of his doctrines about the existence of only one intellect
after death, the possibility of the conjunction between man and the
Active Intellect, the division of men into three classes (according to
their different degrees of knowledge of the highest truths), as well
as the idea of the prophet as a perfect solitary man, which seems to
have been inspired by Ibn Bajja’s well-known work, the
Regimen of the Solitary Man
(
Tadbir al-mutawahhid
);
moreover, Maimonides knew also Ibn Bajja’s hypothesis, according
to which God would be the spirit of the celestial body which includes
all that is around the earth (see Pines’ observations in Moses
Maimonides 1963, 1:ciii-cvii; about Maimonides’ knowledge of Ibn
Bajja’s doctrines, see also Davidson 2005, 114–115). The
last idea was found by Maimonides in Ibn Bajja’s commentary on
Aristotle’s
Physics
, a work which appears to have been
well-known to a later Medieval Jewish philosopher: Shem Tov Ibn
Falaquera. As shown by Bruno Chiesa and Yair Shiffman (Chiesa 1986,
85–86; Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera 2001, 156–157, 180, 207,
221–223, 265–266, 277, 318, 323–328, 331–332),
for commenting on Maimonides’
Guide
Falaquera more or
less literally quoted and shortly commented on a number of passages
taken from various works by Ibn Bajja: not only his
Regimen of the
Solitary Man
and his
Epistle On the Conjunction
, but
also his
Epistle of Farewell
(
Risala al-wada‘
)
and some less known works, like the already mentioned commentary on
Physics
and the commentary on Aristotle’s
De
anima
; some of these quotations are found in Falaquera’s
Book of Degrees
too.
A substantial interest in Ibn Bajja’s philosophical thought was
shown by three other Jewish philosophers living in the first half of
the 14
th
century: Hezekiah bar Halafta, David Ibn Bilia and
Moses Narboni. Hezekiah bar Halafta (nicknamed “Bonenfant de
Millau”), a Provençal Jewish philosopher, wrote in 1320 a
supercommentary to Petrus Hispanus’
Summulae
, where a
number of passages taken from Ibn Bajja’s supercommentaries on
al-Farabi’s own summaries of Porphyry’s
Isagoge
and Aristotle’s
Categories
and
De
interpretatione
are found and commented on: this was the first
and possibly unique case of the influence of Ibn Bajja as a logician
and as an interpreter of al-Farabi on Medieval Jewish treatment of
logic (Zonta 1997b, 576–583). David Ibn Bilia, a Portuguese Jew
working in the period 1320–1340, commissioned a translation of
the
Epistle of Farewell
to a certain Hayyim Ibn Vivas: he
wrote marginal notes on some points of it (see Steinschneider 1893,
358–359). Moses Narboni too commented on this
Epistle
(see Hayoun 1990a; critical edition in Hayoun 1990b); moreover, he
commissioned (or wrote himself) and commented on a Hebrew compendium
of Ibn Bajja’s
Regimen
(critical edition in Hayoun
1987). Narboni’s positive approach to this Arab-Islamic
philosopher might have been suggested by Maimonides’
affirmations about Ibn Bajja. Narboni was a declared Averroist (see
below, 9), but he might have tried to find in Ibn Bajja something in
agreement with Averroes’ philosophical thought.
8. Ibn Tufayl
The unique well-known work by the Spanish Arabo-Islamic philosopher
Ibn Tufayl (d. 1185), the
Living
Son of the Watchful
(
Hayy ben Yaqzan
), exerted a substantially limited
‘influence’ over Medieval Jewish philosophy. For example,
Pines affirms that “there is no evidence to show that Maimonides
was in any way influenced by Ibn Tufayl’s philosophic
tale”, although this influence cannot be totally excluded (Moses
Maimonides 1963, 1:cviii; see also Davidson 2005, 115–116).
The main one among the very few cases of a direct influence of Ibn
Tufayl on a relevant figure of Medieval Judaic thought is the
anonymous Hebrew translation of his work (bearing the title
Iggeret Hayawan ben Yaqtsan
), which was commented on by Moses
Narboni; Narboni’s commentary (apparently, the only extant one
on this text) was written in 1349 and has been very recently published
by Maurice-Ruben Hayoun (Hayoun 2002). Narboni’s commentary
bears the title
Epistle of Conjunction
(
Iggeret
ha-devequt
), so showing that Narboni might have commented on this
particular text in order to find in it a substantial confirmation of
the well-known doctrine about the conjunction between man and the
Active Intellect. As a matter of fact, like in the case of Ibn
Bajja’s philosophical works, Narboni himself might have been the
translator of this work from Arabic into Hebrew, or at least might
have assigned this translation to a member of his “team”.
Narboni’s interpretation of Ibn Tufayl’s work influenced a
number of 15
th
-century Jewish philosophers, mostly in Spain
and Italy, who knew and in some cases were strongly connected to
Averroism (see Steinschneider 1893, 366–368): Joseph Ibn Shem
Tov (living around 1450), Abraham Bibago (d. 1489), Isaac Arama, Isaac
Abravanel (1437–1508), Yohanan Alemanno (living in the second
half of the 15
th
century). Finally, it should be noted that
Ibn Tufayl’s works (not only the
Living Son of the
Watchful
, but also some minor works, apparently lost in their
original Arabic texts) appeared among the main sources of a typical
example of eclectic “Jewish Avicennism” in
14
th
-century Spain: Joseph Ibn Waqqar’s
Treatise
for Reconciling Philosophy and Religious Law
(see Vajda 1962,
128, 132).
9. Averroes (Ibn Rushd) and Some of His Followers
Averroes (Ibn Rushd, 1126–1198) is usually regarded to have been
the major “master” of Islamic philosophy among Jews in the
Late Middle Ages – although he might have had to share this key
position with Avicenna and al-Ghazali. Almost all his philosophical
works were translated from Arabic into Hebrew in the period
1230–1330, sometimes even more than once (only one of them was
later translated from Latin into Hebrew, around 1480); almost all of
them were quoted, summarized, paraphrased, annotated and commented on
by a number of philosophers during the 14
th
and
15
th
centuries. As a matter of fact, some of these texts
are preserved only through these translations, due to the loss of
their original versions, and their success among Jewish philosophers
was surely wider than the success they gained among Arabic thinkers,
and probably equal to the success they gained among Latin Christian
ones. A real history of “Jewish Averroism” has not yet
been written, so that most information about it can be found in
Steinschneider’s book about Medieval Jewish translations
(Steinschneider 1893, 49–339).
Maimonides set the tone of this Jewish approach to Averroes by
affirming in his letter to Samuel Ibn Tibbon: “Take care not to
read Aristotle’s books without the commentaries on them: those
by Alexander (of Aphrodisias), those by Themistius, and those by
Averroes” (Marx 1934–1935, 378). There are some clues to
the fact that Maimonides and Averroes agreed in some key points of
their doctrines, especially in the fields of metaphysics and theology;
however, Maimonides explicitely declared in a letter to his disciple
Joseph ben Judah, written when he had just completed some parts of the
Guide
, that he had received a copy of most of Averroes’
commentaries on Aristotle, but had not yet read them (about the
relationship between Maimonides and Averroes, see Pines’
observations in Moses Maimonides 1963, 1:cviii-cxxi). As a matter of
fact, a concrete, sure proof of Averroes’ influence on
Maimonides’ philosophical thought has not yet been found; but
this does not exclude that he really knew well Averroes’
philosophy. In any case, Maimonides opened the way to a sort of
adoption of Averroes as an unofficial, “Judaizing”
interpreter of Aristotle: the many Western European Jewish followers
of Maimonides’ thought (active in Spain, Provence, and Italy in
the 13
th
-15
th
centuries) seem to have referred
to the above words as a justification for employing the commentaries
of Averroes in reading and interpreting Aristotle’s works.
Significantly, they did not usually employ either Alexander or
Themistius, i.e., the other two commentators recommended by
Maimonides. Their particular choice of Averroes might be explained
either because of the example given by contemporary Latin Christian
commentators, or because of the easier availability of his
commentaries in Spain (where they had been written and had spread
during Averroes’ life) with respect of those by al-Farabi,
Avicenna and Ibn Bajja, or because of the didactic usefulness of them
for knowing in detail Aristotle’s words and the opinions of all
the other Greek and Arabic commentators, whom Averroes quoted and
discussed in his works. Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera, in the introduction to
his work
The Opinions of the Philosophers
(a detailed
commentary on Aristotle’s physics and metaphysics), affirms:
“All that I have written here corresponds to Aristotle’s
words, as they are commented on by the sage Averroes. He was the last
of the commentators (of Aristotle), and collected the cream of the
works of the previous commentators, as well as of Aristotle’s
words”.
A key role in transmitting to Jewish philosophers a direct knowledge
of Averroes’ philosophy was obviously played by the
Arabic-into-Hebrew translations of his works, including
Averroes’ various commentaries on Aristotle’s texts. This
translation process involved a number of scholars: in approximate
chronological order, they were Jacob Anatoli (who finished in Naples
in 1232 his translation of Averroes’ “middle
commentaries” [
talkhisat
] on Porphyry’s
Isagoge
, as well as on Aristotle’s
Categories
[both published in a critical edition in Averrois Cordubensis 1969],
De interpretatione, Prior
and
Posterior Analytics
),
Moses Ibn Tibbon (who wrote in Provence in the period 1244–1261
his translations of Averroes’ summaries of Aristotle’s
Physics
,
De caelo, De generatione
[critical edition:
Averrois Cordubensis 1958],
Meteorology, De anima, De sensu et
sensato
[critical edition: Averrois Cordubensis 1954],
Metaphysics
, as well as that of the “middle
commentary” on the
De anima
[critical edition: Ivry
2003]), Solomon Ibn Ayyub (who wrote in Béziers in 1259 his
translation of the “middle commentary” on the
De
caelo
), Shem Tov ben Isaac of Tortosa (who wrote around
1255–1260 his translation of the “middle commentary”
on the
De anima
), Zerahyah Hen (who finished in Rome in 1284
his translation of the “middle commentaries” on the
Physics
and the
Metaphysics
[critical edition: Zonta
2011]), Jacob ben Makhir (who finished in Provence in 1289 his
translation of the summaries of Porphyry’s
Isagoge
and
Aristotle’s
Organon
, including
Rhetoric
and
Poetics
, and translated in 1302 Averroes’ “middle
commentary” on Aristotle’s
De partibus
and
De
generatione animalium
), Qalonymos ben Qalonymos (who translated
in Arles in the period 1313–1317 the “middle
commentaries” on Aristotle’s
Topics, Sophistical
Confutations, Physics, De generatione
[critical edition: Averrois
Cordubensis 1958]
, Meteorology,
and
Metaphysics
[see
Zonta 2010 and 2011], as well as the “long commentaries”
on the
Posterior Analytics
, the
Physics,
and
possibly on the
Metaphysics
too [about the last work,
however, see Halper 2010 and 2013]), Samuel of Marseilles (who
translated in Beaucaire in 1320–1322 the “middle
commentary” on the
Nicomachean Ethics
[critical
edition: Berman 1999], as well as that on Plato’s
Republic
[critical edition: Rosenthal 1956, 1966], and
revised the previous Arabic-to-Hebrew versions of Averroes’
Epitome of the Organon
and
Middle Commentary on
Porphyry's Isagoge
), Moses of Salon (who translated around 1320
the “long commentary” on the
Metaphysics
,
possibly employing Qalonymos’ previous translation), and Todros
Todrosi (who translated in Trinquetaille in 1337 the “middle
commentaries” on
Rhetoric
and
Poetics
[critical editions: Goldenthal 1842, Lasinio 1872]). Also the first
part of Averroes’ commentary on the
De intellectu
ascribed to Alexander of Aphrodisias was translated into Hebrew
(critical edition: Davidson 1988). Other philosophical works by
Averroes are known through the Arabic-into-Hebrew versions made in the
14
th
century: they include Averroes’
Questions on
Logic
(some of which were written by some Spanish Arabo-Islamic
followers of him) and
Questions on Physics
(English
translation: Goldstein 1990), the
De substantia orbis
(
Fi
l-jirm al-samawi
) — which is lost in Arabic, but is
preserved in an anonymous Medieval Hebrew translation published in a
critical edition by Arthur Hyman (Averroes 1986; about another aspect
of the Medieval Hebrew tradition of this work, see Rigo 1992) —
the
Epistle on the Possibility of the Conjunction of the
Intellect
— which is lost in Arabic, but is preserved in an
anonymous Hebrew translation commented on by Moses Narboni (critical
edition by Kalman P. Bland in Ibn Rushd 1982) — and the treatise
On the First Mover
(
Fi l-muharrik al-awwal
) –
which is lost in Arabic, and is preserved in some Medieval Hebrew
quotations by Moses ha-Levi (see Wolfson 1950) and Shem Tov Ibn
Falaquera. Moreover, Averroes’ defence of Aristotelian (and his
own) philosophy against al-Ghazali’s attacks,
The
Incoherence of the Incoherence
(
Tahafut al-tahafut
), was
first employed as a major source for Falaquera’s
Guide to
the Guide
, and then translated twice into Hebrew in Provence
before 1340, by an anonymous author (Moses Narboni?) and by Qalonymos
ben David Todrosi (maybe, a Jewish Averroist) – by the former
for defending Aristotelianism, and by the latter for showing its
internal contradictions (Steinschneider 1893, 332–337). Finally,
even a very short work on the intellect by Averroes’ son, Abu
Muhammad ‘Abdallah Ibn Rushd, was translated into Hebrew and
might have had some influence on Late Medieval Judaic thought (Burnett
and Zonta 2000).
Almost all these works were quoted and commented on by a number of
14th- and 15th-centuries Jewish philosophers (as for the important
case of Aristotle’s
Physics
, see Glasner 2011). More or
less literal passages taken from the commentaries on Aristotle are
found in part one of Judah ben Solomon ha-Cohen’s encyclopedia,
The Learning of Science
(
Midrash ha-hokhmah
),
written in Judaeo-Arabic and then translated into Hebrew in the period
1235–1247 (Fontaine 2000), and in Falaquera’s
Opinions
of the Philosophers
(Harvey 2000). However, the influence of this
commentaries was widespread in Provence, in the first half of the
14
th
century, when a number of supercommentaries on them
was written down. The famous Jewish philosopher and scientist Levi ben
Gershom (Gersonides, 1288–1344), active in Avignon and in other
Provençal places from 1319 onwards, wrote a series of
supercommentaries on Averroes’ commentaries on Aristotle in the
period 1320–1324; some of his “students” (S.
ha-Levi, Porfash, Solomon of Urgul, Vital), as well as the
Provençal Jewish philosopher Yeda‘yah ha-Penini of
Béziers (1280–1340 circa), followed his example (see
Glasner 1995). Due to his innovative and sometimes critical approach
to the study of Averroes’ Aristotelianism, Gersonides was surely
the most original 14
th
-century Jewish interpreter of
Averroes’ philosophy; but he was not the only major one. A more
faithful approach to Averroes is found in Moses Narboni, who wrote a
number of still unpublished commentaries on his works (not only
supercommentaries on his Aristotelian commentaries, but also
commentaries on some other philosophical texts by Averroes), and
regarded him as the ideal interpreter of Aristotelianism. He affirmed
that there was no need to verify Aristotle’s teaching, since it
was surely true, as confirmed by Averroes’ assertion that
Aristotle had the first and the last word on everything.
Jewish Averroism, in the sense of a substantial agreement with
Averroes’ interpretation of Aristotle’s works, continued
in 15
th
-century Spain and Italy. For example, it was found
in the philosophical supercommentaries on Averroes’
“middle commentaries” on the
Posterior Analytics
and the
Metaphysics
written around 1450 by the Aragonese Jew
Abraham Bibago, as well as in the works of a member of a family of
Spanish Jewish philosophers, the Ibn Shem Tovs: Isaac ben Josef Ibn
Shem Tov, active in the period 1470–1490, wrote a series of
supercommentaries on Averroes’ commentaries on Aristotle’s
Physics
(Wolfson 1929b). Evident traces of it can be found
also in Elijah Delmedigo (1460–1493), who praised Averroes as
the best philosopher after Aristotle and Alexander of Aphrodisias.
However, in some cases it seems that this form of Averroism was
curiously influenced by some Latin Scholastic trends, like Thomism and
Latin Averroism. This might have happened in the anonymous Hebrew
supercommentary on Averroes’ “middle commentary” on
the
Nicomachean Ethics
, probably written in Spain around
1440, as well as in the works written by a 15
th
-century
Italian author: Judah Messer Leon (1425–1498 circa), whose bulk
commentary on books one, two and three of Aristotle’s
Physics
was explicitly based upon Averroes’
“middle” and “long commentaries” on Aristotle,
but employed a lot of direct or indirect Scholastic sources (see Zonta
2006b, 214–217). In other cases, some 15
th
-century
Spanish Jewish philosophers even openly attacked Averroism as an
old-fashioned trend: Eli Habillo did this around 1470, in introducing
his own translation of Antonius Andreas’ questions on
Aristotle’s
Metaphysics
.
Finally, it should be noted that even some of Averroes’
“religious” works were translated into Hebrew and employed
as sources by some Jewish philosophers: the
Decisive Treatise
(
Fasl al-maqal
) (a critical edition of the Hebrew translation
appeared in Golb 1956–1957), the
Appendix
(
Damima
) to it (see Vajda 1954), and the
Disclosure of
the Proof Methods Concerning the Principles of Religion
(
Kashf fi manahig al-adilla fi ‘aqa’id al-milla
)
(see Di Donato 2006). All these works inspired some parts of
Falaquera’s commentary on Maimonides’
Guide
, as
well as his defence of philosophy in the
Epistle of Debate for
Explaining the Concordance between Religious Law and Science
(
Iggeret ha-wikkuah be-ve’ur ha-haskamah asher beyn ha-Torah
we-ha-hokhmah
; critical edition: Harvey 1987); however, apart
from this case, they seems to have had no extensive influence on Late
Medieval Jewish philosophy.
10. Fakhr al-din al-Razi and Sihab al-din al-Suhrawardi
Two Islamic authors pertaining to different ways of Islamic
Avicennism, Fakhr al-din al-Razi (d. 1210) and Sihab al-din
al-Suhrawardi (1155-1191), give evidence of having exerted their
’influence’ over some Jewish philosophers, both in Europe
and in the Near East.
Fakhr al-din al-Razi, a faithful follower and commentator of Avicenna
and his works as an interpreter of Aristotle, was explicitely
mentioned and employed as a source by three 14
th
-century
“Jewish Avicennist” authors (see above, 5). Judah ben
Solomon Natan mentioned al-Razi’s
Oriental Researches
(
al-Mabahit al-mashriqiyya
) as one of his reference points in
the introduction to his translation of al-Ghazali’s
Intentions of the Philosophers
. Todros Todrosi put some
passages of the same work, which he personally translated from Arabic
into Hebrew, in the margin of his own translation of
pseudo-Farabi’s work,
The Sources of Questions
: they
are al-Razi’s definition of the concept of
“notification” or “definition”, and a
metaphysical passage about his “Avicennian” explanation of
the chain of the emanations of the intellects from the First
Intellect, which Todros compares with a similar passage taken from
Avicenna’s
The Salvation
. Moreover, in his
philosophical anthology Todros mentions other passages about logic
allegedly taken from al-Razi, which have not yet been identified.
Finally, Joseph Ibn Waqqar explicitely quotes two passages of
al-Razi’s commentary on Avicenna’s
Remarks and
Admonitions
, the
Core of the Remarks
(
Lubab
al-isharat
) (see Vajda 1962, 125-126).
As for Suhrawardi, one of the “mystical” Islamic
interpreters of Avicenna, he might have been inspired by some of the
philosophical ideas of Abu l-Barakat’s
Book About the Point
of View
, in particular his idea about the angels (see Pines 1979,
254–255), and was explicitly quoted by David ben Joshua
Maimonides (see Fenton 1984, 36–37).
11. Christian Arabic Authors
Some Christian Arabic philosophers working in the 9
th
and
10
th
centuries give evidence of having exerted their
’influence’ upon Medieval Judaic thought. The first of
them was Abd al-Masih Ibn Na‘ima al-Himsi, a collaborator of
al-Kindi: his famous Arabic philosophical work, the “shorter
version” of the
Theology of Aristotle
(a reworking of
parts of books four, five, and six of Plotinus’
Enneads
), as well as other Arabic texts connected to it (the
Sayings of the Greek Sage
, the
De causis
and
pseudo-Empedocles’
Book of the Five Substances
), might
have exerted their direct influence over Solomon Ibn Gabirol, as
suggested by Jacques Schlanger (see Schlanger 1968, 52–109).
Moreover, a “longer version” of the
Theology of
Aristotle
might have been written by a Judaeo-Arabic scholar in
10
th
- or 11
th
-century Egypt: it was apparently
quoted by Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera (Langermann 1999), who in any case
knew and employed also the “shorter version” of it (Fenton
1992), and was translated into Hebrew in the 16
th
century
by Moses Arovas (about this translation, now lost, see Fenton 1986).
Falaquera wrote also a summary of the
Book of the Five
Substances
(edited in Kaufmann 1899, 17–37), which proves
to be useful for reconstructing the contents of the lost original text
(see the French translation by Győngy Hegedüs in De Smet
1998, 208–231). The main role in influencing Jewish philosophy
was played by the
De causis
, an Arabic work mixing up some
aspects of Plotinus’ and Proclus’ theology and probably
written in the 9
th
century in al-Kindi’s circle by a
still unidentified author (a Christian-Arabic one?): it was translated
into Hebrew four times in the period 1260–1480, and exerted its
‘influence’ over a number of Jewish philosophers (see
Rothschild 1985, 1994).
Also a minor philosophical work by a 9
th
-century Christian
Arabic author, the
Book On the Difference between Spirit and
Soul
(
Kitab al-fasl bayna l-ruh wa-l-nafs
), was
translated into Hebrew in the Middle Ages (Steinschneider 1893, 289):
it was quoted by some Medieval Jewish authors. Finally, in the first
half of the 10
th
century, in the circle of
al-Farabi’s followers there was an “exchange of
opinions” about some metaphysical doctrines: it involved the
Christian Arabic philosopher Yahya Ibn ‘Adi and two minor Jewish
scholars, Ibn Abi Sa‘id al-Mawsili and Bishr ibn Sam‘an
ibn ‘Irs, as shown by Shlomo Pines (Pines 1955).
Bibliography
Abrahamov, B. (1995) “The Sources of the Book Mozney
ha-‘iyyunim le-sedeq ha-sar‘efim (in Hebrew),”
Daat
, 34: 83–86.
Altmann, A. and S.M. Stern (1958)
Isaac Israeli. A Neoplatonic
Philosopher of the Early Tenth Century
(Oxford: Oxford University
Press).
Averroes (1986)
De Substantia Orbis: Critical Edition of the
Hebrew Text, With English Translation and Commentary
, ed. A.
Hyman (Cambridge, Mass. and Jerusalem: The Medieval Academy of America
and Israel Academy of Arts and Sciences).
Averrois Cordubensis (1954)
Compendia librorum Aristotelis qui
Parva naturalia vocantur
, ed. H. Blumberg (Cambridge, Mass.: The
Medieval Academy of America).
––– (1958)
Commentarium medium et Epitome in
Aristotelis De generatione et corruptione libros
, ed. S. Kurland
(Cambridge, Mass.: The Medieval Academy of America).
––– (1969)
Commentarium medium in Porphyrii
Isagogen et Aristotelis Categorias
, ed. H. Davidson (Cambridge,
Mass. and Los Angeles: The Medieval Academy of America).
Berman, L.V. (1974) “Maimonides, The Disciple of
Alfarabi,”
Israel Oriental Studies
, 4:
54–78.
––– (1999)
Middle Commentary on
Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics in the Hebrew Version of Samuel
ben Judah
(Jerusalem: Israel Academy of Arts and Sciences).
Blumenthal, D.R. (2007) “Hoter ben Shelomo and His
Worldview,” in D.R. Blumenthal,
Philosophic Mysticism.
Studies in Rational Religion
(Ramat Gan: Bar-Ilan University),
155–171.
Brague, R. (1996)
Maïmonide, Traité de
logique
(Paris: Desclée de Brouwer).
Burnett, Ch. and M. Zonta (2000), “Abu Muhammad
‘Abdallah Ibn Rusd (Averroes Junior), On Whether the Active
Intellect Unites with the Material Intellect Whilst it is Clothed with
the Body,”
Archives d’histoire doctrinale et
littéraire du Moyen Age
, 67: 295–335.
Carusi, P. (2000) “Il trattato alchemico Rutbat al-hakim.
Alcune note sulla sua introduzione,”
Oriente Moderno
(n.s.), 80 (19): 491–502.
Chiesa, B. (1986) “Note su al-Farabi, Averroè e Ibn
Bagga (Avempace) nella tradizione ebraica,”
Henoch
, 8:
79–86.
––– (1989)
Creazione e caduta
dell’uomo nell’esegesi giudeo-araba medievale
(Brescia: Paideia).
Chiesa B. and C. Rigo (1993) “La tradizione manoscritta del
Sefer ha-ma‘alot e una citazione ignorata della Risala fi
‘ilm al-falsafa di al-Farabi,”
Sefarad
, 53:
3–15.
Davidson, H. (1988) “Averroes’ Commentary on
De
intellectu
by Alexander of Aphrodisias (in Hebrew),”
Jerusalem Studies in Jewish Thought
, 7: 205–217.
––– (2004) “Maimonides, Aristotle, and
Avicenna,” in
De Zénon d’Elée à
Poincaré
.
Recueil d’études en hommage
à Roshdi Rashed
, ed. R. Morelon and A. Hasnawi (Louvain
and Paris: Peeters), 719–734.
––– (2005)
Moses Maimonides. The Man and His
Works
(Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press).
––– (2011)
Maimonides the Rationalist
(Oxford: The Littman Library of Jewish Civilization).
De Smet, D. (1998)
Empedocles Arabus. Une lecture
néoplatonicienne tardive
(Brussels: Koninkljike Accademie
voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en Schone Kunsten van Belgie).
Di Donato, S. (2006) “La trasmissione del Kitab al-kasf
‘an manahig al-adilla fi ‘aqa’id al-milla: gli
indizi delle diverse tradizioni del trattato nella traduzione
ebraica,” paper read at the 14th Annual Symposium of the
Société Internationale pour l’Etude de la
Philosophie Médiévale
Averroès,
l’averroïsme, l’antiaverroïsme
(Genève, October 4
th
-6
th
, 2006).
Dobbs-Weinstein, I. (2002) “Maimonides’ Reticence
Towards Ibn Sina,” in
Avicenna and His Heritage
, ed. J.
Janssens and D. De Smet (Leuven: Leuven University Press),
281–296.
Efros, I. (1935) “Palquera’s Reshit Hokmah and
Alfarabi’s Ihsa’ al-‘Ulum,”
The Jewish
Quarterly Review
(n.s.), 25: 227–235.
Eisenmann, E. (2000) “Ahavah ba-Ta‘anugim: A
Fourteenth-Century Encyclopedia of Science and Theology,” in
The Medieval Hebrew Encyclopedias of Science and Philosophy
,
ed. S. Harvey (Dordrecht, Boston and London: Kluwer),
429–440.
Eran, A. (1998)
From Simple Faith to Sublime Faith. Ibn
Daud’s Pre-Maimonidean Thought
(in Hebrew) (Hakibbutz
Hameuhad).
––– (2001) “Al-Ghazali and Maimonides On
the World to Come and Spiritual Pleasures,”
Jewish Studies
Quarterly
, 8: 137–166.
Fenton, P. (1976) “Gleanings from Moseh Ibn
‘Ezras’ Maqalat al-Hadiqa,”
Sefarad
, 36:
285–298.
––– (1984) “The Literary Legacy of David
ben Joshua Maimonides, Last of the Maimonidean
Negidim
,”
The Jewish Quarterly Review
(n.s.),
75: 1–56.
––– (1986) “The Arabic and Hebrew Versions
of the Theology of Aristotle,” in
Pseudo-Aristotle in the
Middle Ages. The Theology and Other Texts
, ed. Jill Kraye,
William F. Ryan and Charles B. Schmitt (London: The Warburg
Institute), 241–264.
––– (1992) “Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera and the
‘Theology of Aristotle’ (in Hebrew),”
Daat
,
29: 27–39.
––– (1997)
Philosophie et
exégèse dans
Le Jardin de la métaphore
de Moïse Ibn ‘Ezra, philosophe et poète andalou
du XIIe siècle
(Leiden: Brill).
Fontaine, R. (1995)
Otot ha-shamayim. Samuel Ibn
Tibbon’s Hebrew Version of Aristotle’s Meteorology
(Leiden: Brill).
––– (2000) “Judah ben Solomon
ha-Cohen’s Midrash ha-Hokhmah: Its Sources and Use of
Sources,” in
The Medieval Hebrew Encyclopedias of Science
and Philosophy
, ed. S. Harvey (Dordrecht, Boston and London:
Kluwer), 191–210.
Freudenthal, G. (2003) “Ketav ha-da‘at or Sefer
ha-Sekhel we-ha-muskalot: The Medieval Hebrew Translations of
al-Farabi’s Risalah fî’l-‘aql. A Study in Text
History and in the Evolution of Medieval Hebrew Philosophical
Terminology,”
The Jewish Quarterly Review
(n.s.), 93:
29–115.
––– (2011a) “The Assimilation of
Greco-Arabic Learning by Medieval Jewish Cultures: A Brief
Bibliographic Introduction,‘ in
Science in Medieval Jewish
Cultures
, ed. G. Freudenthal (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press), 13–16.
––– (2011b) “Arabic and Latin Cultures as
Resources for the Hebrew Translation Movement: Comparative
Considerations, Both Quantitative and Qualitative,‘ in
Science in Medieval Jewish Cultures
, ed. G. Freudenthal
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 74–105.
Freudenthal, G. and M. Zonta (2012) “Avicenna Among Medieval
Jews. The Reception of Avicenna’s Philosophical, Scientific and
Medical Writings in Jewish Cultures, East and West,”
Arabic
Sciences and Philosophy
, 22: 217–287.
Glasner, R. (1995) “Levi ben Gershom and the Study of Ibn
Rushd in the Fourteenth Century,”
The Jewish Quarterly
Review
(n.s.), 86: 51–90.
––– (1996) “The Hebrew Version of De celo
et mundo Attributed to Ibn Sina,”
Arabic Sciences and
Philosophy
, 6: 89–112.
––– (2002) “On Gersonides’ Knowledge
of Languages,”
Aleph
, 2, 235–257.
––– (2011) “The Evolution of the Genre of
Philosophical-Scientific Commentary: Hebrew Supercommentaries on
Aristotle’s Physics,‘ in
Science in Medieval Jewish
Cultures
, ed. G. Freudenthal (Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press), 182–206.
Golb, N. (1956–1957) “The Hebrew Translation of
Averroes’ Fasl al-Maqal,”
Proceedings of the American
Academy for Jewish Research
, 25: 91–113; 26:
41–64.
Goldenthal, J. (1842)
Be’ur Even Rushd le-Sefer
ha-halasah le-Aristu
(Leipzig: H. Franke).
Goldstein, H.T. (1990)
Averroes’ Questions in
Physics
(Dordrecht: Springer).
Halper, Y. (2010)
Averroes on Metaphysical Terminology. An
Analysis and Critical Edition of the Long Commentary on
Aristotle’s Metaphysics Delta
, Ph. D. Thesis, 2 vols.,
Bar-Ilan University of Ramat-Gan.
––– (2013) “Revision and Standardization
of Hebrew Philosophical Terminology in the Fourteenth Century: The
Example of Averroes’ Long Commentary on Aristotle’s
Metaphysics D,”
Aleph
, 13: 95–137.
Harvey, S. (1987)
Falaquera’s Epistle of the Debate. An
Introduction to Jewish Philosophy
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Center for Jewish Studies).
––– (1992) “Did Maimonides’ Letter
to Samuel Ibn Tibbon Determine Which Philosophers Would Be Studied by
Later Jewish Thinkers?,”
The Jewish Quarterly Review
(n.s.), 83: 51–70.
––– (2000) “Shem-Tov Ibn Falaquera’s
De‘ot ha-Filosofim: Its Sources and Use of Sources,” in
The Medieval Hebrew Encyclopedias of Science and Philosophy
,
S. Harvey (ed.), Dordrecht, Boston and London: Kluwer,
211–247.
––– (2001) “Why did Fourteenth-Century
Jews Turn to Alghazali’s Account of Natural Science?,”
The Jewish Quarterly Review
(n.s.), 91: 359–376.
––– (2002) “Falaquera’s Alfarabi. An
Example of the Judaization of the Islamic Falasifah,”
Trumah
, 12: 97–112.
––– (2009) “Avicenna’s Influence on
Jewish Thought: Some Reflections,”
Avicenna and his Legacy:
A Golden Age of Science and Philosophy
, ed. Y. T. Langermann
(Turnhout: Brepols), 327–340.
Hayoun, M.-R. (1987) “Moses of Narbonne and Ibn Bajja (I):
the edition of the Hebrew translation of the Regimen of the Solitary
Man (in Hebrew),”
Daat
, 18: 27–44.
––– (1990a) “Ibn Bajja et Moïse de
Narbonne: édition de l’Iggeret ha-Petirah,” in
Alei Shefer. Studies in the Literature of Jewish Thought
, ed.
M. Hallamish (Ramat Gan: Bar-Ilan University Press), 75-93.
––– (1990b), “Moses of Narbonne and Ibn
Bajja (II): the Hebrew version of the Epistle of Farewell (in
Hebrew),”
Daat
, 25: 93–125.
––– (2002) “Moses Narbonis Kommentar zum
Hayy ibn Yaqzan des ibn Tufayl,”
Trumah
, 12:
199–204, and Hebrew section.
Heller-Wilensky, S.O. (1967) “Isaac Ibn Latif –
Philosopher or Kabbalist?,” in
Jewish
Medieval
and
Renaissance
Studies
, ed. A. Altmann
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press), 185–223.
Horovitz, S. (1903)
Der
Mikrokosmos der Josef Ibn
Saddik
(Breslau: Schatzky).
Ibn Rushd (1982)
The Epistle on the Possibility of Conjunction
with the Active Intellect, with the Commentary of Moses Narboni
,
ed. K.P. Bland (New York: Ktav Publishing House).
Ivry, A.L. (2003)
The Commentary of Averroes on
Aristotle’s De Anima in the Hebrew Translation of Moses b.
Samuel Ibn Tibbon
(in Hebrew) (Jerusalem: Israel Academy of Arts
and Sciences).
Jospe, R. (1994) “Torah and Astrology According to Abraham
Ibn Ezra (in Hebrew),”
Daat
, 32/33: 31–52.
Judah Halevi (1977)
Kitab al-radd wa ’l-dalil fi
’l-din al-dhalil
, ed. D.H. Baneth (Jerusalem: Magnes).
Kaufmann, D. (1880)
Die Spuren al-Batlajusi’s in der
juedischen Religionsphilosophie
(Budapest: Jahresbericht des
Landes-Rabbinerschule in Budapest).
––– (1899)
Studien ueber Salomon ibn
Gabirol
(Budapest: Jahresbericht des Landes-Rabbinerschule in
Budapest).
Kiener, R. (1984) “Jewish Isma’ilism in Twelfth
Century Yemen,”
The Jewish Quarterly Review
(n.s.), 74:
249–266.
Klugman-Barkan, R. (1971)
Shem Tob ben Joseph Ibn
Falaquera’s “Sori Yagon” or “Balm for
Assuaging Grief”. Its Literary Sources and Traditions
,
Ph.D. Thesis, Columbia University (Ann Arbour, Michigan: Xerox
University Microfilms).
Langermann, Y.T. (1996)
Yemenite Midrash. Philosophical
Commentaries on the Torah
(San Francisco: Harper).
––– (1999) “A New Hebrew Passage from the
”Theology of Aristotle“ and Its Significance,”
Arabic Sciences and Philosophy
, 9: 247–259.
Lasinio, F. (1872)
Il commento medio di Averroè alla
Poetica di Aristotele
(Pisa: Annali delle Università
Toscane).
Levin, I. (1983)
Igeret Hay ben Mekitz by Abraham Ibn Ezra. A
Critical Edition Supplemented with a Hebrew Translation of the Arabic
Original Hay Ibn Yaqizian by Abu Abi Alhusain Ibn Abdalla Ibn
Sina
(in Hebrew) (Tel Aviv: Katz Institute for the Study of
Hebrew Literature, Tel Aviv University).
Lévy, T. (1996) “L’histoire des nombres
amiables: le témoignage des textes hébreux
médievaux,”
Arabic Sciences and Philosophy
, 6:
63–87.
Mahdi, M. (1962)
Alfarabi’s Philosophy of Plato and
Aristotle
(New York: The Free Press of Glencoe).
Marx, A. (1934–1935) “Texts By and About
Maimonides,”
The Jewish Quarterly Review
(n.s.), 25:
371–428.
Moses Maimonides (1963)
The Guide of the Perplexed
, tr.
S. Pines, 2 vols. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Pessin, S. (2007) “The Influence of Islamic Thought on
Maimonides,” in
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
,
Summer 2007 Edition, Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2007/entries/maimonides-islamic/
>.
––– (2013)
Ibn Gabirol’s Theology of
Desire. Matter and Method in Jewish Medieval Neoplatonism
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Pines, S. (1955) “A Tenth Century Philosophical
Correspondence,”
Proceedings of the American Academy for
Jewish Research
, 24: 103–136.
––– (1971) “Avicenna,” in
Encyclopaedia Judaica
(Jerusalem: Keter), 3:
955–960.
––– (1979)
Studies in Abu ’l-Barakat
al-Baghdadi Physics and Metaphysics
(Leiden and Jerusalem: Brill
and Magnes Press).
––– (1980) “Shi‘ite Terms and
Conceptions in Judah Halevi’s Kuzari,”
Jerusalem
Studies in Arabic and Islam
, 2: 165–251.
Plessner, M. (1956) “The Importance of R. Shem Tov Ibn
Falaquera for the Study of the History of Philosophy (in
Hebrew),” in
Homenaje à Millas-Vallicrosa
, vol.
II (Barcelona: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientificas),
161–186.
Richler, B. (1977) “Identification of the Anonymous
Translation of the Book of Intellectual Circles (in Hebrew),”
Kiryath sepher
, 53: 577.
Rigo, C. (1992)
Il De substantia orbis di Averroè:
edizione della traduzione latino-ebraica con commento di Yehudah b.
Mosheh Romano
, Ph.D. Thesis, 2 vols. (Università di
Torino).
Ritter, H. and R. Walzer (1938 [1943]) “Studi su al-Kindi
II. Uno scritto morale inedito di al-Kindi (Temistio
Perì
alypìas
?),”
Memorie
della Reale Accademia Nazionale dei Lincei, Classe di Scienze
Morali
, s. VI, vol. 8, 1–63.
Robinson, J. (2009) “Samuel Ibn Tibbon’s
Perush
ha-Millot ha-Zarot
and al-Farabi’s
Eisagoge
and
Categories
,”
Aleph
, 9 (1): 41–76.
Rosenthal, E.I.J. (1956)
Averroes’ Commentary on
Plato’s Republic
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
Second revised edition: 1966.
Rothschild, J.-P. (1985)
Les traductions
hébraïques du
Liberde causis
latin
, Ph.D.
Thesis, 2 vols. (Université de Paris).
––– (1994) “Les traductions du
Livre
des causes
et leur copies,”
Revue d’histoire des
textes
, 24: 393–484.
Schlanger, J. (1968)
La philosophie de Salomon Ibn
Gabirol
(Leiden: Brill).
Schwartz, D. (1995) “Chapters on the Doctrine of the
Divinities by the Circle of the Commentators on the Kuzari in Provence
(in Hebrew),”
Tarbiz
, 64: 401–421.
––– (1996)
Old Things in a New Bottle. The
Speculative Doctrine of the Neoplatonic Circle in
14
th
-Century Jewish Philosophy
(in Hebrew) (Jerusalem:
Mossad Bialik and Ben Tzvi Institute).
Shem Tov Ibn Falaquera (2001)
Moreh ha-Moreh
, ed. Y.
Shiffman (Jerusalem: The World Union of Jewish Studies).
Shiloah, A. (1968) “Falaquera’s Sources in the Chapter
on Music in the Seeker (in Hebrew),” in
Papers of the Fourth
World Congress of Jewish Studies
(Jerusalem: The World Union of
Jewish Studies), 2: 373–377.
Szpiech, R. (2010) “In Search of Ibn Sina’s
”Oriental Philosophy“ in Medieval Castile,” in
Arabic Sciences and Philosophy
, 20: 185–206.
Steinschneider, M. (1893)
Die hebraeischen Uebersetzungen des
Mittelalters und die Juden als Dolmetscher
(Berlin:
Kommissionsverlag des Bibliographischen Bureaus).
Strauss, L. (1936) “Eine vermisste Schrift Farabis,”
Monatschrift zur Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judentums
,
80: 96–106.
Stroumsa, S. (1990) “A Note on Maimonides Attitude to Joseph
Ibn Saddiq (in Hebrew),”
Jerusalem Studies in Jewish
Thought
, 9: 33–38.
Vajda, G. (1938) “Abraham bar Hiyya et al-Farabi,”
Revue des études juives
, 104: 113–119.
––– (1941–1945) “Etudes sur
Qirqisani,”
Revue des études juives
, 106:
87–123.
––– (1947)
La théologie
ascétique de Bahya Ibn Paquda
(Paris: Imprimérie
nationale).
––– (1948) “Un champion de
l’avicennisme. Le problème de l’identité de
Dieu et du premier moteur d’après un opuscule
judéo-arabe inédit du XIIIe siècle,”
Revue thomiste
, 56: 480–508.
––– (1949) “La philosophie et la
théologie de Joseph Ibn Çaddiq,”
Archives
d’histoire doctrinale et littéraire du Moyen Age
,
17: 93–181.
––– (1954) “Les deux versions
hébraïques de la dissertation d’Averroès sur
la science divine,”
Revue des études juives
,
113: 63–66.
––– (1960)
Isaac Albalag, averroïste
juif, traducteur et annotateur d’al-Ghazali
(Paris:
Vrin).
––– (1962)
Recherches sur la philosophie et
la kabbale dans la pensée juive du Moyen Age
(Paris and La
Haye: Mouton).
––– (1965) “A propos d’une citation
non identifiée d’Al-Farabi dans la Guide des
égarés,”
Journal Asiatique
, 254:
43–50.
––– (1977) “La question disputée de
l’essence et de l’existence vue par Juda Cohen, philosophe
juif de Provence,”
Archives d’histoire doctrinale et
littéraire du Moyen Age
, 44: 127–147.
Wolfson, H.A. (1929a)
Crescas’ Critique of
Aristotle
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press).
––– (1929b) “Isaac Ibn Shem-Tov Unknown
Commentaries on the Physics and His Other Unknown Works,” in
Studies in Jewish Bibliography and Related Subjects in Memory of
A.S. Freidus
(New York: The Alexander Kohut Memorial Foundation),
279–290.
––– (1935) “The Internal Senses in Arabic,
Latin, and Hebrew Philosophic Texts,”
Harvard Theological
Review
, 28: 69–133.
––– (1950) “Averroes’ Lost Treatise
on the Prime Mover,”
Hebrew Union College Annual
, 23:
683–710.
Yishaq Albalag (1973)
Sefer tiqqun ha-de‘ot
, ed. G.
Vajda (Jerusalem: Israel Academy of Arts and Sciences).
Zonta, M. (1996)
La filosofia antica nel Medioevo ebraico
(Brescia: Paideia).
––– (1997a) “Linee del pensiero islamico
nella storia della filosofia ebraica medievale,”
Annali
dell’Istituto Orientale di Napoli
, 57: 101–144,
450–483.
––– (1997b) “Fonti antiche e medievali
della logica ebraica nella Provenza del Trecento,”
Medioevo
, 23: 515–594.
––– (2006a) “Al-Farabi’s Long
Commentary on Aristotle’s Categoriae in Hebrew and Arabic: a
critical edition and English translation of the newly-found extant
fragments,” in
Studies in Arabic and Islamic Culture
,
ed. B. Abrahamov, vol. II (Ramat Gan: Bar-Ilan University Press),
185–254.
––– (2006b)
Hebrew Scholasticism in the
Fifteenth Century. A History and Source Book
(Dordrecht:
Springer).
––– (2010) “The Revisions of Qalonymos ben
Qalonymos’s Medieval Hebrew Version of Averroes’s Middle
Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics,”
Documenti e
studi sulla tradizione filosofica medievale
, 21:
457–473.
––– (2011a)
Il Commento medio di Averroè
alla Metafisica di Aristotele nella tradizione ebraica. Edizione delle
versioni ebraiche medievali di Zerahyah Hen e di Qalonymos ben
Qalonymos con introduzione storica e filologica
, 3 vols. (Pavia:
Pavia University Press).
––– (2011b) “Medieval Hebrew Translations
of Philosophical and Scientific Texts: A Chronological Table,‘
in
Science in Medieval Jewish Cultures
, ed. G. Freudenthal
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press), 17–73.
––– (2011c) “Arabic Philosophical Texts,
Jewish Translations of,‘ in
Encyclopedia of Medieval
Philosophy. Between 500 and 1500,
ed. H. Lagerlund (Dordrecht:
Springer), 1: 84–88.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Islamic Philosophy Online
Related Entries
Abner of Burgos
|
al-Farabi
|
al-Ghazali
|
al-Kindi
|
Crescas, Hasdai
|
Delmedigo, Elijah
|
Falaquera, Shem Tov Ibn
|
Gersonides
|
Halevi, Judah
|
Ibn Bâjja [Avempace]
|
Ibn Daud, Abraham
|
Ibn Ezra, Abraham
|
Ibn Gabirol, Solomon [Avicebron]
|
Ibn Rushd [Averroes]
|
Ibn Sina [Avicenna]
|
Ikhwân al-Safâ’
|
Israeli, Isaac
|
Maimonides
|
Maimonides: the influence of Islamic thought on
|
Theology of Aristotle
|
Tibbon, Samuel Ibn