Internet Research Ethics
First published Fri Jun 22, 2012; substantive revision Tue Jan 12, 2021
There is little research that is not impacted in some way on or
through the Internet. The Internet, as a field, a tool, and a venue,
has specific and far-reaching ethical issues. Internet research ethics
is a subdiscipline that fits across many disciplines, ranging from
social sciences, arts and humanities, medical/biomedical, and natural
sciences. Extant ethical frameworks, including
consequentialism
,
deontology
,
virtue ethics
,
 and
feminist ethics
,
 have contributed to the ways in which ethical issues in Internet
research are considered and evaluated.
Conceptually and historically, Internet research ethics is most
related to computer and information ethics and includes such ethical
issues as participant knowledge and consent, data privacy, security,
anonymity and confidentiality, and integrity of data, intellectual
property issues, and community, disciplinary, and professional
standards or norms. Throughout the Internet’s evolution, there
has been continued debate whether there are new ethical dilemmas
emerging, or if the existing dilemmas are similar to dilemmas in other
research realms (Elgesem 2002; Walther 2002; Ess & AoIR 2002;
Marhkam & Buchanan 2012). These debates are similar to
philosophical debates in computer and information ethics. For example,
many years ago, James Moor (1985) asked “what is special about
computers” in order to understand what, if anything, is unique
ethically. Reminding us, however, that research itself must be guided
by ethical principles, regardless of technological intervention, van
Heerden et al. (2020) and Sloan et al. (2020) stress that the
“fundamental principles of conducting ethical social research
remain the same” (Ess & AoIR 2002; King 1996; Samuel and
Buchanan, 2020).
Yet, as the Internet has evolved into a more social and communicative
tool and venue, the ethical issues have shifted from purely
data-driven to more human-centered. “On-ground” or
face-to-face analogies, however, may not be applicable to online
research. For example, the concept of the public park has been used as
a site where researchers might observe others with little ethical
controversy, but online, the concepts of public versus private are
much more complex (SACHRP 2013). Thus, some scholars suggest that the
specificity of Internet research ethics calls for new regulatory
and/or professional and disciplinary guidance. For these reasons, the
concept of human subjects research policies and regulation, informs
this entry, which will continue discussions around ethical and
methodological complexity, including personal identifiability,
reputational risk and harm, notions of public space and public text,
ownership, and longevity of data as they relate to Internet research.
Specifically, the emergence of the social web raises issues around
subject or participant recruitment practices, tiered informed consent
models, and protection of various expectations and forms of privacy in
an ever-increasing world of diffused and ubiquitous technologies.
Additional ethical concerns center on issues of anonymity and
confidentiality of data in spaces where researchers and their subjects
may not fully understand the terms and conditions of those venues or
tools, challenges to data integrity as research projects can be
outsourced or crowdsourced to online labor marketplaces, and
jurisdictional issues as more research is processed, stored, and
disseminated via cloud computing or in remote server locales,
presenting myriad legal complexities given jurisdictional differences
in data laws. Further, the dominance of big data research has
continued across research spaces, with the notions of
“real-world data” and pervasive computing readily accepted
and used in all disciplines. The ease of access and availability to
use big data sets in myriad ways has enabled AI (artificial
intelligence) and ML (machine learning) to grow as standard tools for
researchers.
As a result, researchers using the Internet as a tool for and/or a
space of research—and their research ethics boards (REBs), also
known as institutional review boards (IRBs) in the United States or
human research ethics committees (HRECs) in other countries such as
Australia—have been confronted with a series of new ethical
questions: What ethical obligations do researchers have to protect the
privacy of subjects engaging in activities in “public”
Internet spaces? What are such public spaces? Is there any reasonable
expectation of privacy in an era of pervasive and ubiquitous
surveillance and data tracking? How is confidentiality or anonymity
assured online? How is and should informed consent be obtained online?
How should research on minors be conducted, and how do you prove a
subject is not a minor? Is deception (pretending to be someone you are
not, withholding identifiable information, etc.) an acceptable online
norm or a harm? How is “harm” possible to someone existing
in an online space? How identifiable are individuals in large data
sets? Do human subjects protections apply to big data? As more
industry-sponsored research takes place, what ethical protections
exist outside of current regulatory structures? As laws, such as the
EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR 2016) are enacted,
what are the global implications for data privacy and individual
rights?
A growing number of scholars have explored these and related questions
(see, for example, Bromseth 2002; Bruckman 2006; Buchanan 2004;
Buchanan & Ess 2008; Johns, Chen & Hall 2003; Kitchin 2003,
2008; King 1996; Mann 2003; Markham & Baym 2008; McKee &
Porter 2009; Thorseth 2003; Ess 2016; Zimmer & Kinder-Kurlanda
(eds.) 2017; Samuel & Buchanan, 2020), scholarly associations have
drafted ethical guidelines for Internet research (Ess &
Association of Internet Researchers 2002; Markham, Buchanan, and AoIR
2012; franzke et al., 2020; Kraut et al. 2004), and non-profit
scholarly and scientific agencies such as AAAS (Frankel & Siang
1999) are confronting the myriad of ethical concerns that Internet
research poses to researchers and research ethics boards (REBs).
Given that over 50% of the world population uses the Internet, and
that 97% of the world population now lives within reach of a mobile
cellular signal and 93% within reach of a 3G (or higher) network
(International Telecommunications Union, 2019), continued exploration
of the ethical issues related to research in this heavily mediated
environment is critical.
1. Definitions
2. Human Subjects Research
3. History and Development of IRE as a Discipline
4. Key Ethical Issues in Internet Research
4.1 Privacy
4.2 Recruitment
4.3 Informed Consent
4.3.1 Minors and Consent
4.4 Cloud Computing and Research Ethics
4.5 Big Data Considerations
4.6 Internet Research and Industry Ethics
5. Research Ethics Boards Guidelines
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Cited in Entry
Laws and Government Documents
Professional Standards
Journals, Forums, and Blogs
Other Resources
Related Entries
1. Definitions
The commonly accepted definition of Internet research ethics (IRE) has
been used by Buchanan and Ess (2008, 2009), Buchanan (2011), and Ess
& Association of Internet Researchers (AoIR) (2002):
IRE
is defined as the analysis of ethical issues and
application of research ethics principles as they pertain to research
conducted on and in the Internet. Internet-based research, broadly
defined, is research which utilizes the Internet to collect
information through an online tool, such as an online survey; studies
about how people use the Internet, e.g., through collecting data
and/or examining activities in or on any online environments; and/or,
uses of online datasets, databases, or repositories.
These examples were broadened in 2013 by the United States
Secretary’s Advisory Committee to the Office for Human Research
Protections (SACHRP 2013), and included under the umbrella term
Internet Research:
Research studying information that is already available on or via
the Internet without direct interaction with human subjects
(harvesting, mining, profiling, scraping, observation or recording of
otherwise-existing data sets, chat room interactions, blogs, social
media postings, etc.)
Research that uses the Internet as a vehicle for recruiting or
interacting, directly or indirectly, with subjects (Self-testing
websites, survey tools, Amazon Mechanical Turk, etc.)
Research about the Internet itself and its effects (use patterns
or effects of social media, search engines, email, etc.; evolution of
privacy issues; information contagion; etc.)
Research about Internet users: what they do, and how the Internet
affects individuals and their behaviors Research that utilizes the
Internet as an interventional tool, for example, interventions that
influence subjects’ behavior
Others (emerging and cross-platform types of research and methods,
including m-research (mobile))
Recruitment in or through Internet locales or tools, for example
social media, push technologies
A critical distinction in the definition of Internet research ethics
is that between the Internet as a research tool versus a research
venue. The distinction between tool and venue plays out across
disciplinary and methodological orientations. As a tool, Internet
research is enabled by search engines, data aggregators, digital
archives, application programming interfaces (APIs), online survey
platforms, and crowdsourcing platforms. Internet-based research venues
include such spaces as conversation applications (instant messaging
and discussion forums, for example), online multiplayer games, blogs
and interactive websites, and social networking platforms.
Another way of conceptualizing the distinction between tool and venue
comes from Kitchin (2008), who has referred to a distinction in
Internet research using the concepts of “engaged web-based
research” versus “non-intrusive web-based
research:”
Non-intrusive analyses refer to techniques of data collection that do
not interrupt the naturally occurring state of the site or
cybercommunity, or interfere with premanufactured text. Conversely,
engaged analyses reach into the site or community and thus engage the
participants of the web source (2008: 15).
These two constructs provide researchers with a way of recognizing
when considering of human subject protections might need to occur.
McKee and Porter (2009), as well as Banks and Eble (2007) provide
guidance on the continuum of human-subjects research, noting a
distinction between person-based versus text-based. For example, McKee
and Porter provide a range of research variables (public/private,
topic sensitivity, degree of interaction, and subject vulnerability)
which are useful in determining where on the continuum of text-based
versus how person-based the research is, and whether or not subjects
would need to consent to the research (2009: 87–88).
While conceptually useful for determining human subjects
participation, the distinction between tool and venue or engaged
versus non-intrusive web-based research is increasingly blurring in
the face of social media and their third-party applications. Buchanan
(2016) has conceptualized three phases or stages of Internet research,
and the emergence of social media characterize the second phase, circa
2006–2014. The concept of social media entails
A group of Internet-based applications that build on the ideological
and technological foundations of Web 2.0, and that allow the creation
and exchange of user-generated content (Kaplan & Haenlein 2010:
61).
A “social network site” is a category of websites with
profiles, semi-persistent public commentary on the profile, and a
traversable publicly articulated social network displayed in relation
to the profile.
This collapse of tool and venue can be traced primarily to the
increasing use of third-party sites and applications such as Facebook,
Twitter, or any of the myriad online research tools where subject or
participant recruitment, data collection, data analysis, and data
dissemination can all occur in the same space. With these collapsing
boundaries, the terms of “inter-jurisdictional
coordination” (Gilbert 2009: 3) are inherently challenging;
Gilbert has specifically argued against the terms of use or end-user
license agreement stipulations in virtual worlds, noting that such
agreements are often “flawed”, as they rely on laws and
regulations from a specific locale and attempt to enforce them in a
non place-based environment. Nonetheless, researchers now make
frequent use of data aggregation tools, scraping data from user
profiles or transaction logs, harvesting data from Twitter streams, or
storing data on cloud servers such as Dropbox only after agreeing to
the terms of service that go along with those sites. The use of such
third party applications or tools changes fundamental aspects of
research, oftentimes displacing the researcher or research team as the
sole owner of their data. These unique characteristics implicate
concepts and practicalities of privacy, consent, ownership, and
jurisdictional boundaries.
A key moment that typified and called attention to many of these
concerns emerged with the 2014 Facebook Emotional Contagion study
(Booth, 2014). By virtue of agreeing to Facebook’s Terms of
Service, did users consent to participation in research activities?
Should there have been a debriefing after the experiment? How
thoroughly did a university research ethics board review the study?
Should industry-sponsored research undergo internal ethics review? In
response to the outcry of the Contagion study, Ok Cupid’s
Christian Rudder (2014
 [
OIR
])
 defended these sorts of experiments, noting
We noticed recently that people didn’t like it when Facebook
“experimented” with their news feed. Even the FTC is
getting involved. But guess what, everybody: if you use the Internet,
you’re the subject of hundreds of experiments at any given time,
on every site. That’s how websites work.
The phenomenon of the social web forces an ongoing negotiation between
researchers and their data sources, as seen in the Facebook contagion
study and the subsequent reaction to it. Moreover, with the growing
use and concentration of mobile devices, the notion of Internet
research is expanding with a movement away from a
“place-based” Internet to a dispersed reality. Data
collection from mobile devices has increased exponentially. For
example, mobile devices enable the use of synchronous data collection
and dissemination from non-place based environments. Researchers using
cloud-enabled applications can send and receive data to and from
participants synchronously. The impact of such research possibilities
for epidemiological research is staggering for its scientific
potential while demanding for the concurrent ethical challenges, as we
are seeing with mobile-based COVID-19 research (Drew et al., 2020) and
the sampling of subjects' current behaviors and experiences in
real-time (Hubach et al., forthcoming). As Internet research has grown
from a niche methodology into a nearly ubiquitous and often invisible
practice, the traditional concepts of human subjects research require
careful consideration.
2. Human Subjects Research
The practical, professional, and theoretical implications of human
subjects protections has been covered extensively in scholarly
literature, ranging from medical/biomedical to social sciences to
computing and technical disciplines (see Beauchamp & Childress
2008; Emanual et al. 2003; PRIM&R et al. 2021; Sieber 1992; Wright
2006). Relevant protections and regulations continue to receive much
attention in the face of research ethics violations (see, for example,
Skloot 2010, on Henrietta Lacks; the U.S. Government’s admission
and apology to the Guatemalan Government for STD testing in the 1940s
(BBC 2011); and Gaw & Burns 2011, on how lessons from the past
might inform current research ethics and conduct).
The history of human subjects protections (Sparks 2002 [see
Other Internet Resources aka OIR
])
 grew out of atrocities such as Nazi human experimentation during
World War II, which resulted in the Nuremberg Code (1947);
subsequently followed by the Declaration of Helsinki on Ethical
Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects (World
Medical Association 1964/2008). Partially in response to the Tuskegee
syphilis experiment, an infamous clinical study conducted between 1932
and 1972 by the U.S. Public Health Service studying the natural
progression of untreated syphilis in rural African-American men in
Alabama under the guise of receiving free health care from the
government, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services put forth
a set of basic regulations governing the protection of human subjects
(45 C.F.R. § 46) (see the links in the Other Internet Resources
section, under Laws and Government Documents). This was
later followed by the publication of the “Ethical
Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of Human Subjects of
Research” by the National Commission for the Protection of Human
Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, known as the Belmont
Report (NCPHSBBR 1979). The Belmont Report identifies three
fundamental ethical principles for all human subjects research:
Respect for Persons, Beneficence, and Justice.
To ensure consistency across federal agencies in the United States
context in human subjects protections, in 1991, the Federal Policy for
the Protection of Human Subjects, also known as the “Common
Rule” was codified; the Revised Common Rule was released in the
Federal Register on 19 January 2017, and went into effect 19 July
2018. Similar regulatory frameworks for the protection of human
subjects exist across the world, and include, for example, the
Canadian Tri-Council, the Australian Research Council, The European
Commission, The Research Council of Norway and its National Committee
for Research Ethics in the Social Sciences and Humanities (NESH 2006;
NESH 2019), and the U.K.’s NHS National Research Ethics Service
and the Research Ethics Framework (REF) of the ESRC (Economic and
Social Research Council) General Guidelines, and the Forum for Ethical
Review Committees in Asia and the Western Pacific (FERCAP).
In the United States, the various regulatory agencies who have signed
on to the Common Rule (45 C.F.R. 46 Subpart A) have not issued formal
guidance on Internet research (see the links in the Other Internet
Resources section, under Laws and Government Documents). The
Preamble to the Revised Rule referenced significant changes in the
research environment, recognizing a need to broaden the scope of the
Rule. However, substantial changes to the actual Rule in regards to
Internet research in its broadest context, were minimal.
For example, the Preamble states:
This final rule recognizes that in the past two decades a paradigm
shift has occurred in how research is conducted. Evolving
technologies—including imaging, mobile technologies, and the
growth in computing power—have changed the scale and nature of
information collected in many disciplines. Computer scientists,
engineers, and social scientists are developing techniques to
integrate different types of data so they can be combined, mined,
analyzed, and shared. The advent of sophisticated computer software
programs, the Internet, and mobile technology has created new areas of
research activity, particularly within the social and behavioral
sciences (Federal Register 2017 and HHS 2017).
Modest changes to the definition of human subjects included changing
“data” to “information” and
“biospecimens;” the definition now reads:
(e)
(1)
Human subject
means a living individual about
whom an investigator (whether professional or student) conducting
research:
(i) Obtains information or biospecimens through intervention or
interaction with the individual, and uses, studies, or analyzes the
information or biospecimens; or
(ii) Obtains, uses, studies, analyzes, or generates identifiable
private information or identifiable biospecimens.
(2)
Intervention
includes both physical
procedures by which information or biospecimens are gathered (e.g.,
venipuncture) and manipulations of the subject or the subject's
environment that are performed for research purposes.
(3)
Interaction
includes communication or
interpersonal contact between investigator and subject.
(4)
Private information
includes information
about behavior that occurs in a context in which an individual can
reasonably expect that no observation or recording is taking place,
and information that has been provided for specific purposes by an
individual and that the individual can reasonably expect will not be
made public (e.g., a medical record).
(5)
Identifiable private information
is private
information for which the identity of the subject is or may readily be
ascertained by the investigator or associated with the
information.
(6)
An identifiable biospecimen
is a biospecimen
for which the identity of the subject is or may readily be ascertained
by the investigator or associated with the biospecimen (45 C.F.R.
§ 46.102 (2018)).
However, the Revised Rule does have a provision that stands to be of
import in regards to Internet research; the Rule calls for
implementing departments or agencies to,
[(e)(7)]
(i) Upon consultation with appropriate experts (including experts
in data matching and re-identification), reexamine the meaning of
“identifiable private information”, as defined in
paragraph (e)(5) of this section, and “identifiable
biospecimen”, as defined in paragraph (e)(6) of this section.
This reexamination shall take place within 1 year and regularly
thereafter (at least every 4 years). This process will be conducted by
collaboration among the Federal departments and agencies implementing
this policy. If appropriate and permitted by law, such Federal
departments and agencies may alter the interpretation of these terms,
including through the use of guidance.
(ii) Upon consultation with appropriate experts, assess whether
there are analytic technologies or techniques that should be
considered by investigators to generate “identifiable private
information”, as defined in paragraph (e)(5) of this section, or
an “identifiable biospecimen”, as defined in paragraph
(e)(6) of this section. This assessment shall take place within 1 year
and regularly thereafter (at least every 4 years). This process will
be conducted by collaboration among the Federal departments and
agencies implementing this policy. Any such technologies or techniques
will be included on a list of technologies or techniques that produce
identifiable private information or identifiable biospecimens. This
list will be published in the Federal Register after notice and an
opportunity for public comment. The Secretary, HHS, shall maintain the
list on a publicly accessible Web site (45 C.F.R. § 46.102
(2018)).
As of this writing, there has not yet been a reexamination of the
concepts of “identifiable private information” or
“identifiable biospecimens”. However, as data analytics,
AI, and machine learning continue to expose ethical issues in human
subjects research, we expect to see engaged discussion at the federal
level and amongst research communities (PRIM&R 2021). Those
discussions may refer to previous conceptual work by Carpenter and
Dittrich (2012) and Aycock et al. (2012) that is concerned with risk
and identifiability. Secondary uses of identifiable, private data, for
example, may pose downstream harms, or unintentional risks, causing
reputational or informational harms. Reexaminations of
“identifiable private information” can not occur without
serious consideration of risk and “human harming
research”. Carpenter and Dittrich (2012) encourage
“Review boards should transition from an informed consent driven
review to a risk analysis review that addresses potential harms
stemming from research in which a researcher does not directly
interact with the at-risk individuals” (p. 4) as “[T]his
distance between researcher and affected individual indicates that a
paradigm shift is necessary in the research arena. We must transition
our idea of research protection from ‘human subjects
research’ to ‘human harming research’” (p.
 14).
[
1
]
Similarly, Aycock et al. (2012) assert that
Researchers and boards must balance presenting risks related to the
specific research with risks related to the technologies in use. With
computer security research, major issues around risk arise, for
society at large especially. The risk may not seem evident to an
individual but in the scope of security research, larger populations
may be vulnerable. There is a significant difficulty in quantifying
risks and benefits, in the traditional sense of research
ethics….An aggregation of surfing behaviors collected by a bot
presents greater distance between researcher and respondent than an
interview done in a virtual world between avatars. This distance leads
us to suggest that computer security research focus less concern
around
human subjects research
in the traditional sense and
more concern with
human harming research
(p. 3, italics
original).
These two conceptual notions are relevant for considering emergent
forms of identities or personally identifiable information (PII) such
as avatars, virtual beings, bots, textual and graphical information.
Within the Code of Federal Regulations (45 C.F.R. § 46.102(f)
2009): New forms of representations are considered human subjects if
PII about living individuals is obtained. PII can be obtained by
researchers through scraping data sources, profiles or avatars, or
other pieces of data made available by the platform. Fairfield agrees:
“An avatar, for example, does not merely represent a collection
of pixels—it represents the identity of the user” (2012:
701).
The multiple academic disciplines already long engaged in human
subjects research (medicine, sociology, anthropology, psychology,
communication) have established ethical guidelines intended to assist
researchers and those charged with ensuring that research on human
subjects follows both legal requirements and ethical practices. But
with research involving the Internet—where individuals
increasingly share personal information on platforms with porous and
shifting boundaries, where both the spread and aggregation of data
from disparate sources has become the norm, and where web-based
services, and their privacy policies and terms of service statements,
morph and evolve rapidly—the ethical frameworks and assumptions
traditionally used by researchers and REBs are frequently
challenged.
Research ethics boards themselves are increasingly challenged with the
unique ethical dimensions of internet-based research protocols. In a
2008 survey of U.S. IRBs, less than half of the ethical review boards
identified internet-based research was “an area of concern or
importance” at that time, and only 6% had guidelines or
checklists in place for reviewing internet-based research protocols
(Buchanan & Ess 2009). By 2015, 93% of IRBs surveyed acknowledged
that are ethical issues unique to research using “online
data”, yet only 55% said they felt their IRBs are well versed in
the technical aspects of online data collection, and only 57% agreed
that their IRB has the expertise to stay abreast of changes in online
technology. IRBs are now further challenged with the growth of big
data research (see
§4.5 below
),
 which increasingly relies on large datasets of personal information
generated via social media, digital devices, or other means often
hidden from users. A 2019 study of IRBs revealed only 25% felt
prepared to evaluate protocols relying on big data, and only 6% had
tools sufficient for considering this emerging area of internet
research (Zimmer & Chapman 2020). Further, after being presented
various hypothetical research scenarios utilizing big data and asked
how their IRB would likely review such a protocol, numerous viewpoints
different strongly in many cases. Consider the following scenario:
Researchers plan to scrape public comments from online newspaper pages
to predict election outcomes. They will aggregate their analysis to
determine public sentiment. The researchers don’t plan to inform
commenters, and they plan to collect potentially-identifiable user
names. Scraping comments violates the newspaper’s terms of
service.
18% of respondents indicated their IRB would view this as exempt, 21%
indicated expedited review, 33% suggested it would need full board
review, while 28% did not think this was even human subjects research
that would fall under their IRB’s purview (Zimmer & Chapman
2020). This points to potential gaps and inconsistencies in how IRBs
review the ethical implications of big data research protocols.
3. History and Development of IRE as a Discipline
An extensive body of literature has developed since the 1990s around
the use of the Internet for research (S. Jones 1999; Hunsinger,
Klastrup, & Allen (eds.) 2010; Consalvo & Ess (eds.) 2011;
Zimmer & Kinder-Kurlanda (eds.) 2017), with a growing emphasis on
the ethical dimensions of Internet research.
A flurry of Internet research, and explicit concern for the ethical
issues concurrently at play in it, began in the mid-1990s. In 1996,
Storm King recognized the growing use of the Internet as a venue for
research. His work explored the American Psychological
Association’s guidelines for human subjects research with
emergent forms of email, chat, listservs, and virtual communities.
With careful attention to risk and benefit to Internet subjects, King
offered a cautionary note:
When a field of study is new, the fine points of ethical
considerations involved are undefined. As the field matures and
results are compiled, researchers often review earlier studies and
become concerned because of the apparent disregard for the human
subjects involved (1996: 119).
The 1996 issue of
Information Society
dedicated to Internet
research is considered a watershed moment, and included much seminal
research still of impact and relevance today (Allen 1996;
Boehlefeld 1996; Reid 1996).
Sherry Turkle’s 1997
Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age
of the Internet
called direct attention to the human element of
online game environments. Moving squarely towards person-based versus
text-based research, Turkle pushed researchers to consider human
subjects implications of Internet research. Similarly, Markham’s
Life Online: Researching Real Experience in Virtual Space
(1998) highlighted the methodological complexities of online
ethnographic studies, as did Jacobson’s 1999 methodological
treatment of Internet research. The “field” of study
changed the dynamics of researcher-researched roles, identity, and
representation of participants from virtual spaces. Markham’s
work in qualitative online research has been influential across
disciplines, as research in nursing, psychology, and medicine has
found the potential of this paradigm for online research (Flicker et
al. 2004; Eysenbach & Till 2001; Seaboldt & Kupier 1997; Sharf
1997).
Then, in 1999, the American Association for the Advancement of Science
(AAAS), with a contract from the U.S. Office for Protection from
Research Risks (now known as the Office for Human Research
Protections), convened a workshop, with the goal of assessing the
alignment of traditional research ethics concepts to Internet
research. The workshop acknowledged
The vast amount of social and behavioral information potentially
available on the Internet has made it a prime target for researchers
wishing to study the dynamics of human interactions and their
consequences in this virtual medium. Researchers can potentially
collect data from widely dispersed population sat relatively low cost
and in less time than similar efforts in the physical world. As a
result, there has been an increase in the number of Internet studies,
ranging from surveys to naturalistic observation (Frankel & Siang
1999: 1).
In the medical/biomedical contexts, Internet research has grown
rapidly. Also in 1999, Gunther Eysenbach wrote the first editorial to
the newly formed
Journal of Medical Internet Research
. There
were three driving forces behind the inception of this journal, and
Eysenbach called attention to the growing social and interpersonal
aspects of the Internet:
First, Internet protocols are used for clinical information and
communication. In the future, Internet technology will be the platform
for many telemedical applications. Second, the Internet revolutionizes
the gathering, access and dissemination of non-clinical information in
medicine: Bibliographic and factual databases are now world-wide
accessible via graphical user interfaces, epidemiological and public
health information can be gathered using the Internet, and
increasingly the Internet is used for interactive medical education
applications. Third, the Internet plays an important role for consumer
health education, health promotion and teleprevention. (As an aside,
it should be emphasized that “health education” on the
Internet goes beyond the traditional model of health education, where
a medical professional teaches the patient: On the Internet, much
“health education” is done
“consumer-to-consumer” by means of patient self support
groups organizing in cyberspace. These patient-to-patient interchanges
are becoming an important part of healthcare and are redefining the
traditional model of preventive medicine and health promotion).
With scholarly attention growing and with the 1999 AAAS report
(Frankel & Siang 1999) calling for action, other professional
associations took notice and began drafting statements or guidelines,
or addendum to their extant professional standards. For example, The
Board of Scientific Affairs (BSA) of the American Psychological
Association established an Advisory Group on Conducting Research on
the Internet in 2001; the American Counseling Association’s 2005
revision to its Code of Ethics; the Association of Internet
Researchers (AoIR) Ethics Working Group Guidelines, the National
Committee for Research Ethics in the Social Sciences and the
Humanities (NESH Norway), among others, have directed researchers and
review boards to the ethics of Internet research, with attention to
the most common areas of ethical concern (see
OIR
for links).
While many researchers focus on traditional research ethics
principles, conceptualizations of Internet research ethics depend on
disciplinary perspectives. Some disciplines, notably from the arts and
humanities, posit that Internet research is more about context and
representation than about “human subjects”, suggesting
there is no intent, and thus minimal or no harm, to engage in research
about actual persons. The debate has continued since the early 2000s.
White (2002) argued against extant regulations that favored or
privileged specific ideological, disciplinary and cultural
prerogatives, which limit the freedoms and creativity of arts and
humanities research. For example, she notes that the AAAS report
“confuses physical individuals with constructed materials and
human subjects with composite cultural works”, again calling
attention to the person versus text divide that has permeated Internet
research ethics debates. Another example of disciplinary differences
comes from the Oral History Association, which acknowledged the
growing use of the Internet as a site for research:
Simply put, oral history collects memories and personal commentaries
of historical significance through recorded interviews. An oral
history interview generally consists of a well-prepared interviewer
questioning an interviewee and recording their exchange in audio or
video format. Recordings of the interview are transcribed, summarized,
or indexed and then placed in a library or archives. These interviews
may be used for research or excerpted in a publication, radio or video
documentary, museum exhibition, dramatization or other form of public
presentation. Recordings, transcripts, catalogs, photographs and
related documentary materials can also be posted on the Internet
(Ritchie 2003: 19).
While the American Historical Association (A. Jones 2008) has argued
that such research be “explicitly exempted” from ethical
review board oversight, the use of the Internet could complicate such
a stance if such data became available in public settings or available
“downstream” with potential, unforeseeable risks to
reputation, economic standing, or psychological harm, should
identification occur.
Under the concept of text rather than human subjects, Internet
research rests on arguments of publication and copyright; consider the
venue of a blog, which does not meet the definition of human subject
as in 45 C.F.R. § 46.102f (2009), as interpreted by most ethical
review boards. A researcher need not obtain consent to use text from a
blog, as it is generally considered publicly available, textual,
published material. This argument of the “public park”
analogy that has been generally accepted by researchers is appropriate
for some Internet venues and tools, but not all: Context, intent,
sensitivity of data, and expectations of Internet participants were
identified in 2004 by Sveninngsson as crucial markers in Internet
research ethics considerations.
By the mid-2000s, with three major anthologies published, and a
growing literature base, there was ample scholarly literature
documenting IRE across disciplines and methodologies, and
subsequently, there was anecdotal data emerging from the review boards
evaluating such research. In search of empirical data regarding the
actual review board processes of Internet research from a human
subjects perspective, Buchanan and Ess surveyed over 700 United States
ethics review boards, and found that boards were primarily concerned
with privacy, data security and confidentiality, and ensuring
appropriate informed consent and recruitment procedures (Buchanan
& Ess 2009; Buchanan & Hvizdak 2009).
In 2008, the Canadian Tri-Council’s Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Ethics Special Working Committee: A Working
Committee of the Interagency Advisory Panel on Research Ethics was
convened (Blackstone et al. 2008); and in 2010, a meeting at the
Secretary’s Advisory Committee to the Office for Human Research
Protections highlighted Internet research (SACHRP 2010). Such
prominent professional organizations as the Public Responsibility in
Medicine and Research (PRIM&R) and the American Educational
Research Association (AERA) have begun featuring Internet research
ethics regularly at their conferences and related publications.
Recently, disciplines not traditionally involved in human subjects
research have begun their own explorations of IRE. For example,
researchers in computer security have actively examined the tenets of
research ethics in CS and ICT (Aycock et al. 2012; Dittrich, Bailey,
& Dietrich 2011; Carpenter & Dittrich 2012; Buchanan et al.
2011). Notably, the U.S. Federal Register requested comments on
“The Menlo Report” in December 2011, which calls for a
commitment by computer science researchers to the three principles of
respect for persons, beneficence, and justice, while also adding a
fourth principle on respect for law and public interest (Homeland
Security 2011). SIGCHI, an international society for professionals,
academics, and students interested in human-technology and
human-computer interaction (HCI), has increasingly focused on how IRE
applies to work in their domain (Frauenberger et al. 2017; Fiesler et
al. 2018).
4. Key Ethical Issues in Internet Research
4.1 Privacy
Principles of research ethics dictate that researchers must ensure
there are adequate provisions to protect the privacy of subjects and
to maintain the confidentiality of any data collected. A violation of
privacy or breach of confidentiality presents a risk of serious harm
to participants, ranging from the exposure of personal or sensitive
information, the divulgence of embarrassing or illegal conduct, or the
release of data otherwise protected under law.
Research ethics concerns around individual privacy is often expressed
in terms of the level of linkability of data to individuals, and the
potential harms from disclosure of information As Internet research
has grown in complexity and computational sophistication, ethics
concerns have focused on current and future uses of data, and the
potential downstream harms that could occur. Protecting research
participants’ privacy and confidentiality is typically achieved
through a combination of research tactics and practices, including
engaging in data collection under controlled or anonymous
environments, the scrubbing of data to remove personally identifiable
information (PII), or the use of access restrictions and related data
security methods. And, the specificity and characteristics of the data
will often dictate if there are regulatory considerations, in addition
to the methodological considerations around privacy and
confidentiality. For example, personally identifiable information
(PII) typically demands the most stringent protections. The National
Institutes of Health (NIH), for example, defines PII as:
any information about an individual maintained by an agency,
including, but not limited to, education, financial transactions,
medical history, and criminal or employment history and information
which can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s
identity, such as their name, SSN, date and place of birth,
mother’s maiden name, biometric records, etc., including any
other personal information that is linked or linkable to an individual
(NIH 2010).
Typically, examples of identifying pieces of information have included
personal characteristics (such as date of birth, place of birth,
mother’s maiden name, gender, sexual orientation, and other
distinguishing features and biometrics information, such as height,
weight, physical appearance, fingerprints, DNA and retinal scans),
unique numbers or identifiers assigned to an individual (such as a
name, address, phone number, social security number, driver’s
license number, financial account numbers), and descriptions of
physical location (GIS/GPS log data, electronic bracelet monitoring
information).
The 2018 EU General Data Protection Regulation lays out the legal and
regulatory requirements for data use across the EU. Mondschein &
Monda (2018) provides a thorough discussion on the different types of
data that are considered in the GDPR: Personal data, such as names,
identification numbers, location data, and so on; Special categories
of personal data, such as race or ethic origin, political opinions, or
religious beliefs; Pseudonymous data, referring to data that has been
altered so the subject cannot be directly identified without having
further information; Anonymous data, information which does not relate
to an identifiable natural person or to personal data rendered
anonymous in such a manner that the data subject is not or no longer
identifiable. They also advise researchers to consider
data protection issues at an early stage of a research project is of
great importance specifically in the context of large-scale research
endeavours that make use of personal data (2018: 56).
Internet research introduces new complications to these longstanding
definitions and regulatory frameworks intended to protect subject
privacy. For example, researchers increasingly are able to collect
detailed data about individuals from sources such as Facebook,
Twitter, blogs or public email archives, and these rich data sets can
more easily be processed, compared, and combined with other data (and
datasets) available online. In numerous cases, both researchers and
members of the general public have been able to re-identify
individuals by analyzing and comparing such datasets, using
data-fields as benign as one’s zip code (Sweeny 2002), random
Web search queries (Barbaro & Zeller 2006), or movie ratings
(Narayanan & Shmatikov 2008) as the vital key for reidentification
of a presumed anonymous user. Prior to widespread Internet-based data
collection and processing, few would have considered one’s movie
ratings or zipcode as personally-identifiable. Yet, these cases reveal
that merely stripping traditional “identifiable”
information such as a subject’s name, address, or social
security number is no longer sufficient to ensure data remains
anonymous (Ohm 2010), and requires the reconsideration of what is
considered “personally identifiable information” (Schwartz
& Solove 2011). This points to the critical distinction between
data that is kept confidential versus data that is truly anonymous.
Increasingly, data are rarely completely anonymous, as researchers
have routinely demonstrated they can often reidentify individuals
hidden in “anonymized” datasets with ease (Ohm 2010). This
reality places new pressure on ensuring datasets are kept, at the
least, suitably confidential through both physical and computational
security measures. These measures may also include requirements to
store data in “clean rooms”, or in non-networked
environments in an effort to control data transmission.
Similarly, new types of data often collected in Internet research
might also be used to identify a subject within a previously-assumed
anonymous dataset. For example, Internet researchers might collect
Internet Protocol (IP) addresses when conducting online surveys or
analyzing transaction logs. An IP address is a unique identifier that
is assigned to every device connected to the Internet; in most cases,
individual computers are assigned a unique IP address, while in some
cases the address is assigned to a larger node or Internet gateway for
a collection of computers. Nearly all websites and Internet service
providers store activity logs that link activity with IP addresses, in
many cases, eventually to specific computers or users. Current U.S.
law does not hold IP addresses to be personally identifiable
information, while other countries and regulatory bodies do. For
example, the European Data Privacy Act at Article 29, holds that IP
addresses do constitute PII. Buchanan et al. (2011), note, however,
that under the U.S. Civil Rights Act, for the purposes of the HIPAA
 Act,
[
2
]
IP addresses are considered a form of PII (45 C.F.R. § 164.514
 2002).
[
3
]
There could potentially be a reconsideration by other federal
regulatory agencies over IP addresses as PII, and researchers and
boards will need to be attentive should such change occur.
A similar complication emerges when we consider the meaning of
“private information” within the context of Internet-based
research. U.S. federal regulations define “private
information” as:
[A]ny information about behavior that occurs in a context in which an
individual can reasonably expect that no observation or recording is
taking place, and information that has been provided for specific
purposes by an individual and that the individual can reasonably
expect will not be made public (for example, a medical record) (45
C.F.R. § 46.102(f) 2009).
This standard definition of “private information” has two
key components. First, private information is that which subjects
reasonably expect is not normally monitored or collected. Second,
private information is that which subjects reasonably expect is not
typically publicly available. Conversely, the definition also suggests
the opposite is true: if users cannot reasonably expect data
isn’t being observed or recorded, or they cannot expect data
isn’t publicly available, then the data does not rise to the
level of “private information” requiring particular
privacy protections. Researchers and REBs have routinely worked with
this definition of “private information” to ensure the
protection of individuals’ privacy.
These distinctions take on greater weight, however, when considering
the data environments and collection practices common with
Internet-based research. Researchers interested in collecting or
analyzing online actions of subjects—perhaps through the mining
of online server logs, the use of tracking cookies, or the scraping of
social media profiles and feeds—could argue that subjects do not
have a reasonable expectation that such online activities are not
routinely monitored since nearly all online transactions and
interactions are routinely logged by websites and service providers.
Thus, online data trails might not rise to the level of “private
information”. However, numerous studies have indicated that
average Internet users have incomplete understandings of how their
activities are routinely tracked, and the related privacy practices
and policies of the sites they visit (Hoofnagle & King 2008
 [
OIR
];
 Milne & Culnan 2004; Tsai et al. 2006). Hudson and Bruckman
(2005) conducted empirical research on users’ expectations and
understandings of privacy, finding that participants’
expectations of privacy within public chatrooms conflicted with what
was actually a very public online space. Rosenberg (2010) examined the
public/private distinction in the realm of virtual worlds, suggesting
researchers must determine what kind of social norms and relations
predominate an online space before making assumptions about the
“publicness” of information shared within. Thus, it
remains unclear whether Internet users truly understand if and when
their online activity is regularly monitored and tracked, and what
kind of reasonable expectations truly exist. This ambiguity creates
new challenges for researchers and REBs when trying to apply the
definition of “private information” to ensure subject
privacy is properly addressed (Zimmer 2010).
This complexity in addressing subject privacy in Internet research is
further compounded with the rise of social networking as a place for
the sharing of information, and a site for research. Users
increasingly share more and more personal information on platforms
like Facebook or Twitter. For researchers, social media platforms
provide a rich resource for study, and much of the content is
available to be viewed and downloaded with minimal effort. Since much
of the information posted to social media sites is publicly viewable,
it thus fails to meet the standard regulatory definition of
“private information”. Therefore, researchers attempting
to collect and analyze social media postings might not treat the data
as requiring any particular privacy considerations. Yet, social media
platforms represent a complex environment of social interaction where
users are often required to place friends, lovers, colleagues, and
minor acquaintances within the same singular category of
“friends”, where privacy policies and terms of service are
not fully understood (Madejski et al. 2011), and where the technical
infrastructures fail to truly support privacy projections (Bonneau
& Preibush 2010) and regularly change with little notice (Stone
2009
 [
OIR
];
 Zimmer 2009
 [
OIR
]).
 As a result, it is difficult to understand with any certainty what a
user’s intention was when posting an item onto a social media
platform (Acquisti & Gross 2006). The user may have intended the
post for a private group but failed to completely understand how to
adjust the privacy settings accordingly. Or, the information might
have previously been restricted to only certain friends, but a change
in the technical platform suddenly made the data more visible to
all.
Ohm (2010) warns that
the utility and privacy of data are linked, and so long as data is
useful, even in the slightest, then it is also potentially
reidentifiable (2010: 1751).
With the rapid growth of Internet-based research, Ohm’s concern
becomes even more dire. The traditional definitions and approaches to
understanding the nature of privacy, anonymity, and precisely what
kind of information deserves protection becomes strained, forcing
researchers and REBs to consider more nuanced theories of privacy
(Nissenbaum 2009) and approaches to respecting and projecting subject
privacy (Markham 2012; Zimmer 2010).
4.2 Recruitment
Depending on the type of Internet research being carried out,
recruitment of participants may be done in a number of ways. As with
any form of research, the study population or participants are
selected for specific purposes (i.e., an ethnographic study of a
particular group on online game players), or, can be selected from a
range of sampling techniques (i.e., a convenience sample gleaned from
the users of Amazon’s Mechanical Turk crowdsourcing
 platform
[
4
]
).
 In the U.S. context, a recruitment plan is considered part of the
informed consent process, and as such, any recruitment script or
posting must be reviewed and approved by an REB prior to posting or
beginning solicitation (if the project is human subjects research).
Further, the selection of participants must be impartial and unbiased,
and any risks and benefits must be justly distributed. This concept is
challenging to apply in Internet contexts, in which populations are
often self-selected and can be exclusive, depending on membership and
access status, as well as the common disparities of online access
based on economic and social variables. Researchers also face
recruitment challenges due to online subjects’ potential
anonymity, especially as it relates to the frequent use of pseudonyms
online, having multiple or alternative identities online, and the
general challenges of verifying a subject’s age and demographic
information. Moreover, basic ethical principles for approaching and
recruiting participants involve protecting their privacy and
confidentiality. Internet research can both maximize these
protections, as an individual may never be known beyond a screen name
or avatar existence; or, conversely, the use of IP addresses,
placement of cookies, availability and access to more information than
necessary for the research purposes, may minimize the protections of
privacy and confidentiality.
Much recruitment is taking place via social media; examples include
push technologies, a synchronous approach in which a text or tweet is
sent from a researcher to potential participants based on profile
data, platform activity, or geolocation. Other methods of pull
technologies recruitment include direct email, dedicated web pages,
YouTube videos, direct solicitation via “stickies” posted
on fora or web sites directing participants to a study site, or data
aggregation or scraping data for potential recruitment. Regardless of
the means used, researchers must follow the terms of the
site—from the specific norms and nuances governing a site or
locale to the legal issues in terms of service agreements. For
example, early pro-anorexia web sites (see Overbeke 2008) were often
treated as sensitive spaces deserving spcicial consideration, and
researchers were asked to respect the privacy of the participants and
not engage in research (Walstrom 2004). In the gaming context,
Reynolds and de Zwart (2010) ask:
Has the researcher disclosed the fact that he or she is engaged in
research and is observing/interacting with other players for the
purposes of gathering research data? How does the research project
impact upon the community and general game play? Is the research
project permitted under the Terms of Service?
Colvin and Lanigan (2005: 38) suggest researchers
Seek permission from Web site owners and group moderators before
posting recruitment announcements, Then, preface the recruitment
announcement with a statement that delineates the permission that has
been granted, including the contact person and date received. Identify
a concluding date (deadline) for the research study and make every
effort to remove recruitment postings, which often become embedded
within Web site postings.
Barratt and Lenton, among others, agree:
It is critical, therefore, to form partnerships with online community
moderators by not only asking their permission to post the request,
but eliciting their feedback and support as well (2010: 71).
Mendelson (2007) and Smith and Leigh (1997) note that recruitment
notices need to contain more information than the typical flyers or
advertisements used for newspaper advertisements. Mentioning the
approval of moderators is important for establishing authenticity, and
so is providing detailed information about the study and how to
contact both the researchers and the appropriate research ethics
board.
Given the array of techniques possible for recruitment, the concept of
“research spam” requires attention. The Council of
American Survey Research warns
Research Organizations should take steps to limit the number of survey
invitations sent to targeted respondents by email solicitations or
other methods over the Internet so as to avoid harassment and response
bias caused by the repeated recruitment and participation by a given
pool (or panel) of data subjects (CASRO 2011: I.B.3).
Ultimately, researchers using Internet recruitment measures must
ensure that potential participants are getting enough information in
both the recruitment materials and any subsequent consent documents.
Researchers must ensure that recruitment methods do not lead to an
individual being identified without their permission, and if such
identification is possible, are there significant risks involved?
4.3 Informed Consent
As the cornerstone of human subjects protections, informed consent
means that participants are voluntarily participating in the research
with adequate knowledge of relevant risks and benefits. Providing
informed consent typically includes the researcher explaining the
purpose of the research, the methods being used, the possible outcomes
of the research, as well as associated risks or harms that the
participants might face. The process involves providing the recipient
clear and understandable explanations of these issues in a concise
way, providing sufficient opportunity to consider them and enquire
about any aspect of the research prior to granting consent, and
ensuring the subject has not been coerced into participating. Gaining
consent in traditional research is typically done verbally or in
writing, either in a face-to-face meeting where the researcher reviews
the document, through telephone scripts, through mailed documents,
fax, or video, and can be obtained with the assistance of an advocate
in the case of vulnerable populations. Most importantly, informed
consent was built on the ideal of “process” and the
verification of understanding, and thus, requires an ongoing
communicative relationship between and among researchers and their
participants. The emergence of the Internet as both a tool and a venue
for research has introduced challenges to this traditional approach to
informed consent.
In most regulatory frameworks, there are instances when informed
consent might be waived, or the standard processes of obtaining
informed consent might be modified, if approved by a research ethics
 board.
[
5
]
Various forms of Internet research require different approaches to
the consent process. Some standards have emerged, depending on venue
(i.e., an online survey platform versus a private Facebook group).
However, researchers are encouraged to consider waiver of consent
and/or documentation, if appropriate, by using the flexibilities of
their extant regulations.
Where consent is required but documentation has been waived by an
ethical review board, a “portal” can be used to provide
consent information. For example, a researcher may send an email to
the participant with a link a separate portal or site information page
where information on the project is contained. The participant can
read the documentation and click on an “I agree”
submission. Rosser et al. (2010) recommend using a
“chunked” consent document, whereby individuals can read
specific sections, agree, and then continue onwards to completion of
the consent form, until reaching the study site.
In addition to portals, researchers will often make use of consent
cards or tokens; this alleviates concerns that unannounced researcher
presence is unacceptable, or, that a researcher’s presence is
intrusive to the natural flow and movement of a given locale. Hudson
and Bruckman (2004, 2005) highlighted the unique challenges in gaining
consent in chat rooms, while Lawson (2004) offers an array of consent
possibilities for synchronous computer-mediated communication. There
are different practical challenges in the consent process in Internet
research, given the fluidity and temporal nature of Internet
spaces.
If documentation of consent is required, some researchers have
utilized alternatives such as electronic signatures, which can range
from a simple electronic check box to acknowledge acceptance of the
terms to more robust means of validation using encrypted digital
signatures, although the validity of electronic signatures vary by
jurisdiction.
Regardless of venue, informed consent documents are undergoing changes
in the information provided to research participants. While the basic
elements of consent remain intact, researchers must now acknowledge
with less certainty specific aspects of their data longevity, risks to
privacy, confidentiality and anonymity (see
§4.1 Privacy, above
),
 and access to or ownership of data. Research participants must
understand that their terms of service or end user license agreement
consent is distinct from their consent to participate in research.
And, researchers must address and inform participants/subjects about
potential risk of data intrusion or misappropriation of data if
subsequently made public or available outside of the confines of the
original research. Statements should be revised to reflect such
realities as cloud storage (see
§4.4 below
)
 and data sharing.
For example, Aycock et al. (2012: 141) describe a continuum of
security and access statements used in informed consent documents:
“No others will have access to the data”
“Anonymous identifiers will be used during all data
collection and analysis and the link to the subject identifiers will
be stored in a secure manner”
“Data files that contain summaries of chart reviews and
surveys will only have study numbers but no data to identify the
subject. The key [linking] subject names and these study identifiers
will be kept in a locked file”
“Electronic data will be stored on a password protected and
secure computer that will be kept in a locked office. The software
‘File Vault’ will be used to protect all study data loaded
to portable laptops, flash drives or other storage media. This will
encode all data… using Advanced Encryption Standard with
128-bit keys (AES-128)”
This use of encryption in the last statement may be necessary in
research including sensitive data, such as medical, sexual, health,
financial, and so on. Barratt and Lenton (2010), in their research on
illicit drug use and online forum behaviors, also provide guidance
about use of secure transmission and encryption as part of the consent
process.
In addition to informing participants about potential risks and employing technological protections, NIH-funded researchers whose work includes projects with identifiable, sensitive information will automatically be issued a Certificate of Confidentiality:
CoCs protect the privacy of research subjects by prohibiting
disclosure of identifiable, sensitive research information to anyone
not connected to the research except when the subject consents or in a
few other specific situations (NIH 2021
 [
OIR
]).
However, these do not protect against release of data outside of the
U.S. Given the reality of Internet research itself, which inherently
spans borders, new models may be in order to ensure confidentiality of
data and protections of data. Models of informed consent for
traditional international research are fundamentally challenging due
to cultural specificity and norms (Annas 2009; Boga et al. 2011;
Krogstad et al. 2010); with Internet research, where researchers may
be unaware of the specific location of an individual, consent takes on
significantly higher demands. While current standards of practice show
that consent models stem from the jurisdiction of the researcher and
sponsoring research institution, complications arise in the face of
age verification, age of majority/consent, reporting of adverse
effects or complaints with the research process, and authentication of
identity. Various jurisdictional laws around privacy are relevant for
the consent process; a useful tool is Forrester’s Data Privacy
Heat Map, which relies on in-depth analyses of the data
privacy-related laws and cultures of countries around the world,
helping researchers design appropriate approaches to privacy and data
protection given the particular context (see
OIR
).
In addition, as more federal agencies and funding bodies across the
globe encourage making research data publicly-available (i.e., NSF,
NIH, Wellcome Trust, Research Councils U.K.), the language used in
consent documents will change accordingly to represent this intended
longevity of data and opportunities for future, unanticipated use.
Given the ease with which Internet data can flow between and among
Internet venues, changes in the overall accessibility of data might
occur (early “private” newsgroup conversations were made
“publicly searchable” when Google bought DejaNews), and
reuse and access by others is increasingly possible with shared
datasets. Current data sharing mandates must be considered in the
consent process. Alignment between a data sharing policy and an
informed consent document is imperative. Both should include
provisions for appropriate protection of privacy, confidentiality,
security, and intellectual property.
There is general agreement in the U.S. that individual consent is not
necessary for researchers to use publicly available data, such as
public Twitter feeds. Recommendations were made by The National Human
Subjects Protection Advisory Committee (NHRPAC) in 2002 regarding
publicly available data sets (see
OIR
).
 Data use or data restriction agreements are commonly used and set the
parameters of use for researchers.
The U.K. Data Archive
 (2011 [
OIR
])
 provides guidance on consent and data sharing:
When research involves obtaining data from people, researchers are
expected to maintain high ethical standards such as those recommended
by professional bodies, institutions and funding organisations, both
during research and when sharing data. Research data — even
sensitive and confidential data — can be shared ethically and
legally if researchers pay attention, from the beginning of research,
to three important aspects:
• when gaining informed consent, include provision for data
sharing
• where needed, protect people’s identities by anonymising
data
• consider controlling access to data These measures should be
considered jointly. The same measures form part of good research
practice and data management, even if data sharing is not envisioned.
Data collected from and about people may hold personal, sensitive or
confidential information. This does not mean that all data obtained by
research with participants are personal or confidential.
Data sharing made public headlines in 2016 when a Danish researcher
released a data set comprised of scraped data from nearly 70,000 users
of the OkCupid online dating site. The data set was highly
reidentifiable and included potentially sensitive information,
including usernames, age, gender, geographic location, what kind of
relationship (or sex) they’re interested in, personality traits,
and answers to thousands of profiling questions used by the site. The
researcher claimed the data were public and thus, such sharing and use
was unproblematic. Zimmer (2016) was among many privacy and ethics
scholars who critiqued this stance.
The Danish researchers did not seek any form of consent or debriefing
on the collection and use of the data, nor did they have any ethics
oversight. Many researchers and ethics boards are, however, attempting
to mitigate some of these ethical concerns by including blanket
statements in their consent processes, indicating such precautions for
research participants. For example,
I understand that online communications may be at greater risk for
hacking, intrusions, and other violations. Despite these
possibilities, I consent to participate.
A more specific example comes from the Canadian context when
researchers propose to use specific online survey tools hosted in the
United States; REBs commonly recommend the following type language for
use in informed consent documents:
Please note that the online survey is hosted by Company ABC which is a
web survey company located in the U.S.A. All responses to the survey
will be stored and accessed in the U.S.A. This company is subject to
U.S. Laws, in particular, to the U.S. Patriot Act/Domestic Security
Enhancement Act that allows authorities access to the records that
your responses to the questions will be stored and accessed in the
U.S.A. The security and private policy for Company ABC can be viewed
at
 http://…/.
[
6
]
Researchers are also encouraged to review the Terms of Use and Terms
of Service of the application that are being used, demonstrating its
details to the REB in the application and informing participants of
such details in the informed consent form or script. Researchers are
also encouraged to consider broader contextual factors of the data
source and research goals when weighing the possible violation of a
platform’s Terms of Service (Fiesler, Beard, & Keegan
2020).
4.3.1 Minors and Consent
Internet research poses particular challenges to age verification,
assent and consent procedures, and appropriate methodological
approaches with minors. Age of consent varies across countries,
states, communities, and locales of all sorts. For research conducted
or supported by U.S. federal agencies bound by the Common Rule,
children are
persons who have not attained the legal age for consent [18, in the
U.S.] to treatments or procedures involved in the research, under the
applicable law of the jurisdiction in which the research will be
conducted (45 C.F.R. § 46.402(a) 2009).
Goldfarb (2008) provides an exhaustive discussion of age of majority
across the U.S. states, with a special focus on
clinical
research
, noting children must be seven or older to assent to
participation (see 45 C.F.R. § 46 Subpart D 2009).
Spriggs (2010), from the Australian context, notes that while no
formal guidance exists on Internet research and minors under the
National Statement
, she advises:
Parental consent may be needed when information is potentially
identifiable. Identifiable information makes risks to individuals
higher and may mean that the safety net of parental consent is
preferable.
There is also a need to consider whether seeking parental consent
would make things worse e.g., by putting a young person from a
dysfunctional home at risk or result in disclosure to the researcher
of additional identifying information about the identity and location
of the young person. Parental consent may be “contrary to the
best interests” of the child or young person when it offers no
protection or makes matters worse (2010: 30).
To assist with the consent process, age verification measures can be
used. These can range from more technical software applications to
less formal knowledge checks embedded in an information sheet or
consent document. Multiple confirmation points (asking for age, later
asking for year of birth, etc.) are practical measures for
researchers. Depending on the types of data, sensitivity of data, use
of data, researchers and boards will carefully construct the
appropriate options for consent, including waiver of consent, waiver
of documentation, and/or waiver of parental consent.
4.4 Cloud Computing and Research Ethics
Recent developments in cloud computing platforms have led to unique
opportunities—and ethical challenges—for researchers.
Cloud computing describes the deployment of computing resources via
the Internet, providing on-demand, flexible, and scalable computing
from remote locations. Examples include web-based email and
calendaring services provided by Google or Yahoo, online productivity
platforms like Google Docs or Microsoft Office 365, online file
storage and sharing platforms like Dropbox or Box.net, and large-scale
application development and data processing platforms such as Google
Apps, Facebook Developers Platform, and Amazon Web Services.
Alongside businesses and consumers, researchers have begun utilizing
cloud computing platforms and services to assist in various tasks,
including subject recruitment, data collection and storage,
large-scale data processing, as well as communication and
collaboration (Allan 2011
 [
OIR
];
 X. Chen et al. 2010
 [
OIR
]);
 Simmhan et al. 2008; Simmhan et al. 2009).
As reliance on cloud computing increases among researchers, so do the
ethical implications. Among the greatest concerns is ensuring data
privacy and security with cloud-based services. For researchers
sharing datasets online for collaborative processing and analysis,
steps must be taken to ensure only authorized personnel have access to
the online data that might contain PII, but also that suitable
encryption is used for data transfer and storage, and that the cloud
service provider maintains sufficient security to prevent breaches.
Further, once research data is uploaded to a third-party cloud
provider, attention must be paid to the terms of service for the
contracted provider to determine what level of access to the data, if
any, might be allowed to advertisers, law enforcement, or other
external agents.
Alongside the privacy and security concerns, researchers also have an
ethical duty of data stewardship which is further complicated when
research data is placed in the cloud for storage or processing. Cloud
providers might utilize data centers spread across the globe, meaning
research data might be located outside the United States, and its
legal jurisdictions. Terms of service might grant cloud providers a
license to access and use research data for purposes not initially
intended or approved of by the subjects involved. Stewardship may
require the prompt and complete destruction of research data, a
measure complicated if a cloud provider has distributed and backed-up
the data across multiple locations.
A more unique application of cloud computing for research involves the
crowdsourcing of data analysis and processing functions, that is,
leveraging the thousands of users of various online products and
services to complete research related tasks remotely. Examples include
using a distributed network of video game players to assist in solving
protein folding problems (Markoff 2010), and leveraging Amazon’s
Mechanical Turk crowdsourcing marketplace platform to assist with
large scale data processing and coding functions that cannot be
automated (Conley & Tosti-Kharas 2014; J. Chen et al. 2011). Using
cloud-based platforms can raise various critical ethical and
methodological issues.
First, new concerns over data privacy and security emerge when
research tasks are widely distributed across a global network of
users. Researchers must take great care in ensuring research data
containing personal or sensitive information isn’t accessible by
outsourced labor, or that none of the users providing crowdsourced
labor are able to aggregate and store their own copy of the research
dataset. Second, crowdsourcing presents ethical concerns over trust
and validity of the research process itself. Rather than a local team
of research assistants usually under a principal investigator’s
supervision and control, crowdsourcing tends to be distributed beyond
the direct management or control of the researcher, providing less
opportunity to ensure sufficient training for the required tasks.
Thus, researchers will need to create additional means of verifying
data results to confirm tasks are completed properly and
correctly.
Two additional ethical concerns with crowdsourcing involve labor
management and authorship. Mechanical Turk users were not originally
intended to be research subjects, first and foremost. However,
researchers using Mechanical Turks must ensure that the laborers on
the other end of the cloud-based relationship are not being exploited,
that they are legally eligible to be working for hire, and that the
incentives provided are real, meaningful, and appropriate (Scholz
2008; Williams 2010
 [
OIR
).
Finally, at the end of a successful research project utilizing
crowdsourcing, a researcher may be confronted with the ethical
challenge of how to properly acknowledge the contributions made by
(typically anonymous) laborers. Ethical research requires the fair and
accurate description of authorship. Disciplines vary as to how to
report relative contributions made by collaborators and research
assistants, and this dilemma increases when crowdsourcing is used to
assist with the research project.
4.5 Big Data Considerations
Algorithmic processing is a corollary of big data research, and
newfound ethical considerations have emerged. From “algorithmic
harms” to “predictive analytics”, the power of
today’s algorithms exceeds long-standing privacy beliefs and
norms. Specifically, the National Science and Technology Council
note:
“Analytical algorithms” as algorithms for prioritizing,
classifying, filtering, and predicting. Their use can create privacy
issues when the information used by algorithms is inappropriate or
inaccurate, when incorrect decisions occur, when there is no
reasonable means of redress, when an individual’s autonomy is
directly related to algorithmic scoring, or when the use of predictive
algorithms chills desirable behavior or encourages other privacy
harms. (NSTC 2016: 18).
While the concept of big data is not new, and the term has been in
technical discourses since the 1990s, public awareness and response to
big data research is much more recent. Following the rise of social
media-based research, Buchanan (2016) has delineated the emergence of
“big data”-based research from 2012 to the present, with
no signs of an endpoint.
Big data research is challenging for research ethics boards, often
presenting what the computer ethicist James Moor would call
“conceptual muddles”: the inability to properly
conceptualize the ethical values and dilemmas at play in a new
technological context. Subject privacy, for example, is typically
protected within the context of research ethics through a combination
of various tactics and practices, including engaging in data
collection under controlled or anonymous environments, limiting the
personal information gathered, scrubbing data to remove or obscure
personally identifiable information, and using access restrictions and
related data security methods to prevent unauthorized access and use
of the research data itself. The nature and understanding of privacy
become muddled, however, in the context of big data research, and as a
result, ensuring it is respected and protected in this new domain
becomes challenging.
For example, the determination of what constitutes “private
information”—and thus triggering particular privacy
concerns—becomes difficult within the context of big data
research. Distinctions within the regulatory definition of
“private information”—namely, that it only applies
to information which subjects reasonably expect is not normally
monitored or collected and not normally publicly
available—become less clearly applicable when considering the
data environments and collection practices that typify big data
research, such as the wholesale scraping of Facebook news feed content
or public OKCupid accounts.
When considered through the lens of the regulatory definition of
“private information”, social media postings are often
considered public, especially when users take no visible, affirmative
steps to restrict access. As a result, big data researchers might
conclude subjects are not deserving of particular privacy
consideration. Yet, the social media platforms frequently used for big
data research purposes represent a complex environment of
socio-technical interactions, where users often fail to understand
fully how their social activities might be regularly monitored,
harvested, and shared with third parties, where privacy policies and
terms of service are not fully understood and change frequently, and
where the technical infrastructures and interfaces are designed to
make restricting information flows and protecting one’s privacy
difficult.
As noted
in §4.1 above
it becomes difficult to confirm a user’s intention when sharing
information on a social media platform, and whether users recognize
that providing information in a social environment also opens it up
for widespread harvesting and use by researchers. This uncertainty in
the intent and expectations of users of social media and
internet-based platforms—often fueled by the design of the
platforms themselves—create numerous conceptual muddles in our
ability to properly alleviate potential privacy concerns in big data
research.
The conceptual gaps that exist regarding privacy and the definition of
personally identifiable information in the context of big data
research inevitably lead to similar gaps regarding when informed
consent is necessary. Researchers mining Facebook profile information
or public Twitter streams, for example, typically argue that no
specific consent is necessary due to the fact the information was
publicly available. It remains unknown whether users truly understood
the technical conditions under which they made information visible on
these social media platforms or if they foresaw their data being
harvested for research purposes, rather than just appearing onscreen
for fleeting glimpses by their friends and followers (Fiesler &
Proferes, 2018). In the case of the Facebook emotional contagion
experiment (Kramer, Guillory, & Hancock 2014), the lack of
obtaining consent was initially rationalized through the notion that
the research appeared to have been carried out under Facebook’s
extensive terms of service, whose data use policy, while more than
9,000 words long, does make passing mention to “research”.
It was later revealed, however, that the data use policy in effect
when the experiment was conducted never mentioned
“research” at all (Hill 2014).
Additional ethical concerns have arisen surrounding the large scale
data collection practices connected to machine learning and the
development of artificial intelligence. For example, negative public
attention have surrounded algorithms designed to infer sexual
orientation from photographs and facial recognition algorithms trained
on videos of transgender people. In both cases, ethical concerns have
been raised about both the purpose of these algorithms and the fact
that the data that trained them (dating profile photos and YouTube
videos, respectively) was “public” but collected from
potentially vulnerable populations without consent (Metcalf 2017;
Keyes 2019). While those building AI systems cannot always control the
conditions under which the data they utilize is collected, their
increased use of big datasets captured from social media or related
sources raises a number of concerns beyond what typically is
considered part of the growing focus on AI ethics: fairness,
accountability and transparency in AI can only be fully possible when
data collection is achieved in a fair, ethical, and just manner (Stahl
& Wright 2018; Kerry 2020).
4.6 Internet Research and Industry Ethics
The Facebook emotional contagion experiment, discussed above, is just
one example in a larger trend of big data research conducted outside
of traditional university-based research ethics oversight mechanisms.
Nearly all online companies and platforms analyze data and test
theories that often rely on data from individual users. Industry-based
data research, once limited to marketing-oriented “A/B
testing” of benign changes in interface designs or corporate
communication messages, now encompasses information about how users
behave online, what they click and read, how they move, eat, and
sleep, the content they consume online, and even how they move about
their homes. Such research produces inferences about
individuals’ tastes and preferences, social relations,
communications, movements, and work habits. It implies pervasive
testing of products and services that are an integral part of intimate
daily life, ranging from connected home products to social networks to
smart cars. Except in cases where they are partnering with academic
institutions, companies typically do not put internal research
activities through a formal ethical review process, since results are
typically never shared publicly and the perceived impact on users is
minimal.
The growth of industry-based big data research, however, presents new
risks to individuals’ privacy, on the one hand, and to
organizations’ legal compliance, reputation, and brand, on the
other hand. When organizations process personal data outside of their
original context, individuals may in some cases greatly benefit, but
in other cases may be surprised, outraged, or even harmed. Soliciting
consent from affected individuals can be impractical: Organizations
might collect data indirectly or based on identifiers that do not
directly match individuals’ contact details. Moreover, by
definition, some non-contextual uses—including the retention of
data for longer than envisaged for purposes of a newly emergent
use—may be unforeseen at the time of collection. As Crawford and
Schultz (2014) note,
how does one give notice and get consent for innumerable and perhaps
even yet-to-be-determined queries that one might run that create
“personal data”? (2014: 108)
With corporations developing vast “living laboratories”
for big data research, research ethics has become a critical component
of the design and oversight of these activities. For example, in
response to the controversy surrounding the emotional contagion
experiment, Facebook developed an internal ethical review process
that, according to its facilitators,
leverages the company’s organizational structure, creating
multiple training opportunities and research review checkpoints in the
existing organizational flow (Jackman & Kanerva 2016: 444).
While such efforts are important and laudable, they remain open for
improvement. Hoffmann (2016), for example, has criticized Facebook for
launching
an ethics review process that innovates on process but tells us little
about the ethical values informing their product development.
Further, in their study of employees doing the work of ethics inside
of numerous Silicon Valley companies, Metcalf and colleagues found
considerable tension between trying to resolve thorny ethical dilemmas
that emerge within an organization’s data practices and the
broader business model and corporate logic that dominates internal
decision-making (Metcalf, Moss, & boyd 2019).
5. Research Ethics Boards Guidelines
While many researchers and review boards across the world work without
formal guidance, many research ethics boards have developed guidelines
for Internet research. While many such guidelines exist, the following
provides examples for researchers preparing for an REB review, or for
boards developing their own policies.
Bard College (New York) Guidelines for Internet Research
Loyola University Chicago Policy for Online Survey Research Involving Human Participants
Penn State Guidelines for Computer- and Internet-Based Research Involving Human Participants
U.K. Data Archive Further Resources
University of California-Berkeley Data Security and Human Research Data Risk Assessment Matrix (pdf)
University of Connecticut Guidance for Computer and Internet-Based Research Involving Human Participants
Additional resources are found in
Other Internet Resources
below.
Bibliography
Acquisti, Alessandro and Ralph Gross, 2006, “Imagined
Communities: Awareness, Information Sharing, and Privacy on the
Facebook”, in
Privacy Enhancing Technologies: PET 2006
,
George Danezis and Philippe Golle (eds.), (Lecture Notes in Computer
Science 4258), Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp.
36–58. doi:10.1007/11957454_3
Allen, Christina, 1996, “What’s Wrong with the
‘Golden Rule’? Conundrums of Conducting Ethical Research
in Cyberspace”,
The Information Society
, 12(2):
175–188. doi:10.1080/713856146
Annas, George J., 2009, “Globalized Clinical Trials and
Informed Consent”,
New England Journal of Medicine
,
360(20): 2050–2053. doi:10.1056/NEJMp0901474
Aycock, John, Elizabeth Buchanan, Scott Dexter, and David
Dittrich, 2012, “Human Subjects, Agents, or Bots: Current Issues
in Ethics and Computer Security Research”, in
Financial
Cryptography and Data Security
, George Danezis, Sven Dietrich,
and Kazue Sako (eds.), (Lecture Notes in Computer Science 7126),
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 138–145.
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-29889-9_12
Banks, Will and Michelle Eble, 2007, “Digital Spaces, Online
Environments, and Human Participant Research: Interfacing with
Institutional Review Boards”, in
Digital Writing Research:
Technologies, Methodologies, and Ethical Issues
, Heidi A. McKee
and Dànielle Nicole DeVoss (eds.), Cresskill, NJ: Hampton
Press, pp. 27–47.
Barbaro, Michael and Tom Zeller Jr., 2006, “A Face Is
Exposed for AOL Searcher No. 4417749”,
The New York
Times
, 9 August 2006, pp. A1.
Barratt, Monica Jane and Simon Lenton, 2010, “Beyond
Recruitment? Participatory Online Research with People Who Use
Drugs”,
International Journal of Internet Research
Ethics
, 3(1): 69–86.
 [
Barratt and Lenton 2010 available online
]
BBC, 2011, “US Scientists ‘Knew Guatemala Syphilis
Tests Unethical’”, BBC News, 30 August 2011, sec. Latin
America & Caribbean.
 [
BBC 2011 available online
]
Beauchamp, Tom L. and James F. Childress, 2008,
Principles of
Biomedical Ethics
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Blackstone, Mary, Lisa Given, Joseph Levy, Michelle McGinn,
Patrick O’Neill, Ted Palys, and Will van den Hoonaard, 2008,
Extending the Spectrum: The TCPS and Ethical Issues Involving
Internet-Based Research
, Interagency Advisory Panel and
Secretariat on Research Ethics, Ottawa, Canada.
 [
Blackstone et al. 2008 available online
]
Boehlefeld, Sharon Polancic, 1996, “Doing the Right Thing:
Ethical Cyberspace Research”,
The Information Society
,
12(2): 141–152. doi:10.1080/713856136
Boga, Mwanamvua, Alun Davies, Dorcas Kamuya, Samson M. Kinyanjui,
Ester Kivaya, Francis Kombe, Trudie Lang, Vicki Marsh, Bibi Mbete,
Albert Mlamba, et al., 2011, “Strengthening the Informed Consent
Process in International Health Research through Community Engagement:
The KEMRI-Wellcome Trust Research Programme Experience”,
PLoS Medicine
, 8(9): e1001089.
doi:10.1371/journal.pmed.1001089
Bonneau, Joseph and Sören Preibusch, 2010, “The Privacy
Jungle: On the Market for Data Protection in Social Networks”,
in
Economics of Information Security and Privacy
, Tyler
Moore, David Pym, and Christos Ioannidis (eds.), Boston: Springer US,
pp. 121–167. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-6967-5_8
Booth, Robert, 2014, “Facebook reveals news feed experiment
to control emotions”,
The Guardian
, 29 June 2014.
 [
Booth 2014 available online
]
Bromseth, Janne C. H., 2002, “Public Places: Public
Activities? Methodological Approaches and Ethical Dilemmas in Research
on Computer-mediated Communication Contexts”, in
Researching
ICTs in Context
, Andrew Morrison (ed.), InterMedia Report 3/2002,
Oslo: University of Oslo, pp. 33–61.
 [
Bromseth 2002 available online
]
Brothers, Kyle Bertram and Ellen Wright Clayton, 2010,
“‘Human Non-Subjects Research’: Privacy and
Compliance”,
The American Journal of Bioethics
, 10(9):
15–17. doi:10.1080/15265161.2010.492891
Bruckman, Amy, 2006, “Teaching Students to Study Online
Communities Ethically”,
Journal of Information Ethics
,
15(2): 82–98. doi:10.3172/JIE.15.2.82
Buchanan, Elizabeth A. (ed.), 2004,
Readings in Virtual
Research Ethics: Issues and Controversies
, Hershey, PA:
Information Science Publishing.
–––, 2006, “Introduction: Internet
Research Ethics at a Critical Juncture”,
Journal of
Information Ethics
, 15(2): 14–17.
doi:10.3172/JIE.15.2.14
–––, 2011, “Internet Research Ethics:
Past, Present, and Future”, in Consalvo and Ess 2011:
83–108. doi:10.1002/9781444314861.ch5
–––, 2016, “Ethics in Digital
Research”, in
Handbuch Soziale Praktiken und Digitale
Alltagswelten
, Heidrun Friese, Gala Rebane, Marcus Nolden, and
Miriam Schreiter (eds.), Wiesbaden: Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden, pp.
1–9. doi:10.1007/978-3-658-08460-8_47-1
Buchanan, Elizabeth A. and Charles M. Ess, 2008, “Internet
Research Ethics: The Field and Its Critical Issues”, in
The
Handbook of Information and Computer Ethics
, Kenneth Einar Himma
and Herman T. Tavani (eds.), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
pp. 273–292. doi:10.1002/9780470281819.ch11
–––, 2009, “Internet Research Ethics and
the Institutional Review Board: Current Practices and Issues”,
ACM SIGCAS Computers and Society
, 39(3): 43–49.
doi:10.1145/1713066.1713069
Buchanan, Elizabeth A. and Erin E. Hvizdak, 2009, “Online
Survey Tools: Ethical and Methodological Concerns of Human Research
Ethics Committees”,
Journal of Empirical Research on Human
Research Ethics
, 4(2): 37–48.
doi:10.1525/jer.2009.4.2.37
Buchanan, Elizabeth, John Aycock, Scott Dexter, David Dittrich,
and Erin Hvizdak, 2011, “Computer Science Security Research and
Human Subjects: Emerging Considerations for Research Ethics
Boards”,
Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research
Ethics
, 6(2): 71–83. doi:10.1525/jer.2011.6.2.71
Carpenter, Katherine J. and David Dittrich, 2012, “Bridging
the Distance: Removing the Technology Buffer and Seeking Consistent
Ethical Analysis in Computer Security Research”, in
Digital
Ethics: Research & Practice
(Digital Formations 85), Don
Heider and Adrienne Massanari (eds.), New York: Peter Lang, pp.
1–29.
[CASRO] Council of American Survey Research, 2011, “CASRO
Code of Standards and Ethics for Survey Research”, First adopted
1977 and revised since.
 [
CASRO code available online
]
Chen, Jenny J., Natala J. Menezes, and Adam D. Bradley, 2011,
“Opportunities for Crowdsourcing Research on Amazon Mechanical
Turk”,
Interfaces
, 5(3).
 [
J. Chen, Menezes, and Bradley 2011 available online
]
Colvin, Jan and Jane Lanigan, 2005, “Ethical Issues and Best
Practice Considerations for Internet Research”,
Journal of
Family and Consumer Sciences
, 97(3): 34–39.
Conley, Caryn and Jennifer Tosti-Kharas, 2014,
“Crowdsourcing Content Analysis for Managerial Research”,
Management Decision
, 52(4): 675–688.
doi:10.1108/MD-03-2012-0156
Consalvo, Mia and Charles Ess (eds.), 2011,
The Handbook of
Internet Studies
, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
doi:10.1002/9781444314861
Crawford, Kate and Jason Schultz, 2014, “Big Data and Due
Process: Toward a Framework to Redress Predictive Privacy
Harms”,
Boston College Law Review
, 55(1):
93–128.
Dittrich, David, Michael Bailey, and Sven Dietrich, 2011,
“Building an Active Computer Security Ethics Community”,
IEEE Security & Privacy Magazine
, 9(4): 32–40.
doi:10.1109/MSP.2010.199
Drew, David A., Long H. Nguyen, Claire J. Steves, Cristina Menni,
Maxim Freydin, Thomas Varsavsky, Carole H. Sudre, M. Jorge Cardoso,
Sebastien Ourselin, Jonathan Wolf, et al., 2020, “Rapid
Implementation of Mobile Technology for Real-Time Epidemiology of
COVID-19”,
Science
, 368(6497): 1362–1367.
doi:10.1126/science.abc0473
Elgesem, Dag, 2002, “What Is Special about the Ethical
Issues in Online Research?”,
Ethics and Information
Technology
, 4(3): 195–203. doi:10.1023/A:1021320510186
Emanuel, Ezekiel J., Robert A. Crouch, John D. Arras, Jonathan D.
Moreno, and Christine Grady (eds.), 2003,
Ethical and Regulatory
Aspects of Clinical Research: Readings and Commentary
, Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Ess, Charles, 2016, “Phronesis for machine ethics?  Can
robots perform ethical judgments?”,
Frontiers in Artificial
Intelligence and Applications
, 290: 386–389.
doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-708-5-386
Ess, Charles and the Association of Internet Researchers (AoIR)
Ethics Working committee, 2002, “Ethical Decision-Making and
Internet Research: Recommendations from the AoIR Ethics Working
Committee”, Approved by the AoIR, 27 November 2002.
 [
Ess and AoIR 2002 available online
]
Eysenbach, Gunther, 1999, “Welcome to the Journal of Medical
Internet Research”,
Journal of Medical Internet
Research
, 1(1): e5. doi:10.2196/jmir.1.1.e5
Eysenbach, Gunther and James E. Till, 2001, “Ethical Issues
in Qualitative Research on Internet Communities”,
BMJ
,
323(7321): 1103–1105. doi:10.1136/bmj.323.7321.1103
Fairfield, Joshua A., 2012, “Avatar Experimentation: Human
Subjects Research in Virtual Worlds”,
U.C. Irvine Law
Review
, 2: 695–772.
Federal Register, 2011, “Submission for Review and Comment:
‘The Menlo Report: Ethical Principles Guiding Information and
Communication Technology Research’” (“Menlo
Report”) for the Department of Homeland Security (DHS), Science
and Technology, Cyber Security Division (CSD), Protected Repository
for the Defense of Infrastructure Against Cyber Threats
(PREDICT)”, 28 December 2011, Volume 76, Number 249, Docket No.
DHS-2011-0074.
 [
Federal Register 2011 available online
]
–––, 2017, “Federal Policy for the
Protection of Human Subjects”, 19 January 2017, Volume 82,
Number 12
 [
Federal Register 2017 available online
]
Fiesler, Casey, Nathan Beard, and Brian C. Keegan, 2020, “No
Robots, Spiders, or Scrapers: Legal and Ethical Regulation of Data
Collection Methods in Social Media Terms of Service”,
Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social
Media
, 14: 187–196.
 [
Fiesler, Beard, and Keegan 2020 available online
]
Fiesler, Casey, Jeff Hancock, Amy Bruckman, Michael Muller, Cosmin
Munteanu, and Melissa Densmore, 2018, “Research Ethics for HCI:
A Roundtable Discussion”, in
Extended Abstracts of the 2018
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
, , Montreal
QC Canada: ACM, 1–5. doi:10.1145/3170427.3186321
Fiesler, Casey and Nicholas Proferes, 2018,
“‘Participant’ Perceptions of Twitter Research
Ethics”,
Social Media + Society
, 4(1), first online 10
March 2018.  doi:10.1177/2056305118763366
Flicker, Sarah, Dave Haans, and Harvey Skinner, 2004,
“Ethical Dilemmas in Research on Internet Communities”,
Qualitative Health Research
, 14(1): 124–134.
doi:10.1177/1049732303259842
Fossheim, Hallvard and Helene Ingierd (eds.), 2016,
Internet
Research Ethics:
, Oslo: Cappelen Damm Akademisk/NOASP.
doi:10.17585/noasp.3.1
Frankel, Mark S. and Sanyin Siang, 1999, “Ethical and Legal
Aspects of Human Subjects Research in Cyberspace”, A Report of a
Workshop, 10–11 June 1999, Washington, DC: American Association
for the Advancement of Science.
 [
Frankel and Siang 1999 available online
]
Franzke, Aline Shakti, Anja Bechmann, Michael Zimmer, Charles M.
Ess, and the Association of Internet Researchers (AoIR), 2020,
Internet Research: Ethical Guidelines 3.0
, AoIR.
 [
Franzke et al. available online (pdf)
]
Frauenberger, Christopher, Amy S. Bruckman, Cosmin Munteanu,
Melissa Densmore, and Jenny Waycott, 2017, “Research Ethics in
HCI: A Town Hall Meeting”, in
Proceedings of the 2017 CHI
Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems
– CHI EA ’17
, Denver: ACM Press, pp. 1295–1299.
doi:10.1145/3027063.3051135
Gaw, Allan and Michael H. J. Burns, 2011,
On Moral Grounds:
Lessons from the History of Research Ethics
, Westerwood,
Glasgow: SA Press.
[GDPR] General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR),
2016, “Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural
persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data, and repealing Directive 95/46”.
 [
available online
]
Gilbert, Brendan James, 2009, “Getting to Conscionable:
Negotiating Virtual Worlds’ End User License Agreements without
Getting Externally Regulated”,
Journal of International
Commercial Law and Technology
, 4(4): 238–251.
 [
Gilbert 2009 available online
]
Glickman, Seth W., Sam Galhenage, Lindsay McNair, Zachry Barber,
Keyur Patel, Kevin A. Schulman, and John G. McHutchison, 2012,
“The Potential Influence of Internet-Based Social Networking on
the Conduct of Clinical Research Studies”,
Journal of
Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics
, 7(1): 71–80.
doi:10.1525/jer.2012.7.1.71
Goldfarb, Norman M., 2008, “Age of Consent for Clinical
Research”,
Journal of Clinical Research Best Practices
,
4(6).
 [
Goldfarb 2008 available online
]
[HHS] Health and Human Services, 2017, “Excerpts from the
January 19, 2017 Revised Common Rule Preamble”.
 [
HHS 2017 available online
]
Hill, Kashmir, 2014, “Facebook Added ‘Research’
To User Agreement 4 Months After Emotion Manipulation Study”,
Forbes.com.
, 30 June 2014.
 [
Hill 2014 available online
]
Hoffmann, Anna Lauren, 2016, “Facebook has a New Process for
Discussing Ethics. But is It Ethical?”
The Guardian
, 17
June 2016.
 [
Hoffmann 2016 available online
]
Homeland Security Department, 2011, “Submission for Review
and Comment: ‘The Menlo Report: Ethical Principles Guiding
Information and Communication Technology Research’”,
Federal Register: The Daily Journal of the United States
Government
, FR Doc. 2011-3323, 28 December 2011.
 [
Homeland Security Department 2011 available online
].
Hubach, Randolph D., Andrew O’Neil, Mollie Stowe, Zachary
Giano, Brenda Curtis, and Celia B. Fisher, forthcoming,
“Perceived Confidentiality Risks of Mobile Technology-Based
Ecologic Momentary Assessment to Assess High-Risk Behaviors Among
Rural Men Who Have Sex with Men”,
Archives of Sexual
Behavior
, first online: 20 February 2020.
doi:10.1007/s10508-019-01612-x
Hudson, James M. and Amy Bruckman, 2004, “‘Go
Away’: Participant Objections to Being Studied and the Ethics of
Chatroom Research”,
The Information Society
, 20(2):
127–139. doi:10.1080/01972240490423030
–––, 2005, “Using Empirical Data to Reason
about Internet Research Ethics”, in
ECSCW 2005: Proceedings
of the Ninth European Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative
Work, 18–22 September 2005, Paris, France
, Hans Gellersen,
Kjeld Schmidt, Michel Beaudouin-Lafon, and Wendy Mackay (eds.),
Berlin/Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 287–306.
doi:10.1007/1-4020-4023-7_15
Hunsinger, Jeremy, Lisbeth Klastrup, and Matthew Allen (eds.),
2010,
International Handbook of Internet Research
, Dordrecht:
Springer Netherlands. doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-9789-8
Illingworth, Nicola, 2001, “The Internet Matters: Exploring
the Use of the Internet as a Research Tool”,
Sociological
Research Online
, 6(2): 79–90. doi:10.5153/sro.600
 [
Illingworth 2001 available online
]
International Telecommunications Union, 2019, “New ITU Data
Reveal Growing Internet Uptake but a Widening Digital Gender
Divide”,
ITU Media Centre
,
 [
ITU 2019 available online
]
Jackman, Molly and Lauri Kanerva, 2016, “Evolving the IRB:
Building Robust Review for Industry Research”,
Washington
and Lee Law Review Online
, 72(3): 442–457.
Jacobson, David, 1999, “Doing Research in Cyberspace”,
Field Methods
, 11(2): 127–145.
doi:10.1177/1525822X9901100204
Johns, Mark D., Shing-Ling Sarina Chen, and G. Jon Hall (eds.),
2003,
Online Social Research: Methods, Issues, and Ethics
,
New York: Peter Lang.
Jones, Arnita, 2008, “AHA Statement on IRB’s and Oral
History Research”,
American Historical Association
Activities
, 1 February 2008.
 [
A. Jones 2008 available online
]
Jones, Steve (ed.), 1999,
Doing Internet Research: Critical
Issues and Methods for Examining the Net
, Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Kaplan, Andreas M. and Michael Haenlein, 2010, “Users of the
World, Unite! The Challenges and Opportunities of Social Media”,
Business Horizons
, 53(1): 59–68.
doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2009.09.003
Kerry, Cameron F., 2020, “Protecting privacy in an AI-driven
world” (AI Governance), 10 February 2020, Center for Technology
Innovation, Brookings Institute.
 [
Kerry 2020 available online
]
Keyes, Os, 2019, “Counting the Countless: Why data science
is a profound threat for queer people”,
Real Life
, 8
April 2019.
 [
Keyes 2019 available online
]
King, Storm A., 1996, “Researching Internet Communities:
Proposed Ethical Guidelines for the Reporting of Results”,
The Information Society
, 12(2): 119–128.
doi:10.1080/713856145
Kitchin, Heather A., 2003, “The Tri-Council Policy Statement
and Research in Cyberspace: Research Ethics, the Internet, and
Revising a ‘Living Document’”,
Journal of
Academic Ethics
, 1(4): 397–418.
doi:10.1023/B:JAET.0000025671.83557.fa
–––, 2008,
Research Ethics and the Internet:
Negotiating Canada’s Tri-Council’s Policy
, Winnipeg,
Manitoba: Fernwood Publishing
Kramer, Adam D. I., James E. Guillory, and Jeffrey T. Hancock,
2014, “Experimental Evidence of Massive-Scale Emotional
Contagion through Social Networks”,
Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences
, 111(24): 8788–8790.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1320040111
Kraut, Robert, Judith Olson, Mahzarin Banaji, Amy Bruckman,
Jeffrey Cohen, and Mick Couper, 2004, “Psychological Research
Online: Report of Board of Scientific Affairs’ Advisory Group on
the Conduct of Research on the Internet.”,
American
Psychologist
, 59(2): 105–117.
doi:10.1037/0003-066X.59.2.105
Krogstad, Donald J., Samba Diop, Amadou Diallo, Fawaz Mzayek,
Joseph Keating, Ousmane A. Koita, and Yéya T. Touré,
2010, “Informed Consent in International Research: The Rationale
for Different Approaches”,
The American Journal of Tropical
Medicine and Hygiene
, 83(4): 743–747.
doi:10.4269/ajtmh.2010.10-0014
Lawson, Danielle, 2004, “Blurring the Boundaries: Ethical
Considerations for Online Research Using Synchronous CMC
Forums”, in Buchanan 2004: 80–100.
Leibovici, Didier G., Suchith Anand, Jerry Swan, James Goulding,
Gobe Hobona, Lucy Bastin, Sergiusz Pawlowicz, Mike Jackson, and
Richard James, 2010, “Workflow Issues for Health Mapping
‘Mashups’ of OGC”, University of Nottingham, CGS
Technical Report, 2010 DL1.
 [
Leibovici et al. 2010 available online
]
Madejski, Michelle, Maritza Lupe Johnson, and Steven Michael
Bellovin, 2011, “The Failure of Online Social Network Privacy
Settings”. Columbia Research Report CUCS-010-11, Columbia
University. doi:10.7916/D8NG4ZJ1
Mann, Chris, 2003, “Generating Data Online: Ethical Concerns
and Challenges for the C21 Researcher”, in Thorseth 2003:
31–49.
Markham, Annette N., 1998,
Life Online: Researching Real
Experience in Virtual Space
, Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira
Press.
–––, 2012, “Fabrication as Ethical
Practice: Qualitative Inquiry in Ambiguous Internet Contexts”,
Information, Communication & Society
, 15(3):
334–353. doi:10.1080/1369118X.2011.641993
Markham, Annette N. and Nancy K. Baym (eds.), 2008,
Internet
Inquiry: Conversations about Method
, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publications.
Markham, Annette, N. and Elizabeth Buchanan, 2012. :
Ethical decision-making and internet research: Version 2.0.
recommendations from the AoIR ethics working committee
Association of Internet Researchers.
 [
Markham and Buchanan 2012 available online
]
Markoff, John, 2010, “In a Video Game, Tackling the
Complexities of Protein Folding”,
New York Times
, 4
August 2010.
 [
Markoff 2010 available online
]
McKee, Heidi A. and James E. Porter, 2009,
The Ethics of
Internet Research: A Rhetorical, Case-based Process
, New York:
Peter Lang Publishing.
Mendelson, Cindy, 2007, “Recruiting Participants for
Research From Online Communities”,
CIN: Computers,
Informatics, Nursing
, 25(6): 317–323.
doi:10.1097/01.NCN.0000299653.13777.51
Metcalf, Jacob, 2017, “‘The Study Has Been Approved by
the IRB’: Gayface AI, Research Hype and the Pervasive Data
Ethics Gap”. PERVADE Team: Pervasive Data Ethics for
Computational Research, Report.
 [
Metcalf 2017 available online
]
Metcalf, Jacob, Emanuel Moss, and danah boyd, 2019, “Owning
Ethics: Corporate Logics, Silicon Valley, and the Institutionalization
of Ethics”,
Social Research: An International
Quarterly
, 86(2): 449–476.
Milne, George R. and Mary J. Culnan, 2004, “Strategies for
Reducing Online Privacy Risks: Why Consumers Read (or Don’t
Read) Online Privacy Notices”,
Journal of Interactive
Marketing
, 18(3): 15–29. doi:10.1002/dir.20009
Mondschein, Christopher F. and Cosimo Monda, 2018, “The
EU’s General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) in a Research
Context”, in
Fundamentals of Clinical Data Science
,
Pieter Kubben, Michel Dumontier, and Andre Dekker (eds.), Cham:
Springer International Publishing, pp. 55–71.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-99713-1_5
Moor, James H., 1985, “What Is Computer Ethics?”,
Metaphilosophy
, 16(4): 266–275.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-9973.1985.tb00173.x
Alexander, Larry and Michael Moore, 2007, “Deontological
Ethics”,
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2007 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.). URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2007/entries/ethics-deontological/
>
Narayanan, Arvind and Vitaly Shmatikov, 2008, “Robust
de-anonymization of Large Sparse Datasets”,
Proceedings of
the 29
th
IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy, Oakland,
CA, May 2008
, IEEE, pp. 111–125. doi:10.1109/SP.2008.33
 [
Narayanan and Shmatikov 2008 available online (pdf)
]
[NCPHSBBR] The National Commission for the Protection of Human
Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research, 1979, “The
Belmont Report: Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection
of Human Subjects of Research”, Office for Human Research
Protections, Department of Health and Human Services, United States.
 [
NCPHSBBR 1979 available online
]
[NESH] The National Committee for Research Ethics in the Social
Sciences and the Humanities [Norway], 2006, “Guidelines for
Research Ethics in the Social Sciences, Law, and Humanities”,
Published September 2006.
 [
NESH 2006 available online
].
–––, 2019, “A Guide to Internet Research
Ethics”.
 [
NESH 2019 available online
].
Nissenbaum, Helen, 2009,
Privacy in Context: Technology,
Policy, and the Integrity of Social Life
, Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
[NSTC] National Science and Technology Council, 2016,
“National Privacy Research Strategy”, Office of the
President of the United States, June 2016.
 [
NSTC 2016 available online
]
Nuremberg Code, 1947 (1996), “The Nuremberg Code”,
BMJ
, 313.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.313.7070.1448
Ohm, Paul, 2010, “Broken Promises of Privacy: Responding to
the Surprising Failure of Anonymization”,
UCLA Law
Review
, 57: 1701–1777.
Overbeke, Grace, 2008, “Pro-Anorexia Websites: Content,
Impact, and Explanations of Popularity”,
Mind Matters: The
Wesleyan Journal of Psychology
, 3: 49–62.
 [
Overbeke 2008 available online
]
[PRIM&R] Public Responsibility in Medicine and Research,
Bankert, E., Gordon, B., Hurley, E., and Shriver, S.
(eds), 2021,
Institutional Review Board: Management and
Function
(third edition). Burlington, MA: Jones and
Bartlett.
Reid, Elizabeth, 1996, “Informed Consent in the Study of
On-Line Communities: A Reflection on the Effects of Computer-Mediated
Social Research”,
The Information Society
, 12(2):
169–174. doi:10.1080/713856138
Reynolds, Ren, and Melissa de Zwart, 2010, “The Duty to
‘Play’: Ethics, EULAs and MMOs”,
International
Journal of Internet Research Ethics
, 3(1): 48–68.
 [
Reynolds & de Zwart 2010 available online
]
Ritchie, Donald A., 2003,
Doing Oral History: A Practical
Guide
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Rosenberg, Åsa, 2010, “Virtual World Research Ethics
and the Private/Public Distinction”,
International Journal
of Internet Research Ethics
, 3(1): 23–37.
Rosser, B. R. Simon, J. Michael Oakes, Joseph Konstan, Simon
Hooper, Keith J. Horvath, Gene P. Danilenko, Katherine E. Nygaard, and
Derek J. Smolenski, 2010, “Reducing HIV Risk Behavior of Men Who
Have Sex with Men through Persuasive Computing: Results of the
Menʼs INTernet Study-II”,
AIDS
, 24(13):
2099–2107. doi:10.1097/QAD.0b013e32833c4ac7
[SACHRP] Secretary’s Advisory Committee to the Office for
Human Research Protections, Unitd States Department of Health &
Human Services, 2010,
 “
SACHRP July 20–21, 2010 Meeting Presentations
”.
–––, 2013,
 “
Attachment B: Considerations and Recommendations concerning Internet Research and Human Subjects Research Regulations, with Revisions
”,
 Final document approved 12–13 March 2013.
 (
SACHRP 2013 pdf version
)
–––, 2013, “Considerations and
Recommendations Concerning Internet Research and Human Subjects
Research Regulations, with Revisions”.
 [
SACHRP 2013 available online
]
–––, 2015,
 “
Attachment A: Human Subjects Research Implications of ‘Big Data’ Studies
”,
 24 April 2015.
Samuel, Gabrielle and Elizabeth Buchanan, 2020, “Guest
Editorial: Ethical Issues in Social Media Research”,
Journal
of Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics
, 15(1–2):
3–11. doi:10.1177/1556264619901215
Scholz, Trebor, 2008, “Market Ideology and the Myths of Web
2.0”,
First Monday
, 13(3): 3 March 2008.
 [
Scholz 2008 available online
]
Schwartz, Paul M. and Daniel J. Solove, 2011, “The PII
Problem: Privacy and a New Concept of Personally Identifiable
Information”,
New York University Law Review
, 86(6):
1814–1893.
Seaboldt, James A. and Randy Kuiper, 1997, “Comparison of
Information Obtained from a Usenet Newsgroup and from Drug Information
Centers”,
American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy
,
54(15): 1732–1735. doi:10.1093/ajhp/54.15.1732
Sharf, Barbara F., 1997, “Communicating Breast Cancer
On-Line: Support and Empowerment on the Internet”,
Women
& Health
, 26(1): 65–84. doi:10.1300/J013v26n01_05
Sieber, Joan E., 1992,
Planning Ethically Responsible
Research: A Guide for Students and Internal Review Boards
,
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
–––, 2015,
Planning Ethically Responsible
Research: A Guide for Students and Internal Review Boards
, second
edition, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Simmhan, Yogesh, Roger Barga, Catharine van Ingen, Ed Lazowska,
and Alex Szalay, 2008, “On Building Scientific Workflow Systems
for Data Management in the Cloud”, in
2008 IEEE Fourth
International Conference on EScience
, Indianapolis, IN: IEEE, pp.
434–435. doi:10.1109/eScience.2008.150
Simmhan, Yogesh, Catharine van Ingen, Girish Subramanian, and Jie
Li, 2009, “Bridging the Gap between the Cloud and an EScience
Application Platform”. Microsoft Research Tech Report
MSR-TR-2009-2021.
 [
Simmhan et al. 2009 available online
]
Skloot, Rebecca, 2010,
The Immortal Life of Henrietta
Lacks
, New York: Crown Publishers.
Sloan, Luke, Curtis Jessop, Tarek Al Baghal, and Matthew Williams,
2020, “Linking Survey and Twitter Data: Informed Consent,
Disclosure, Security, and Archiving”,
Journal of Empirical
Research on Human Research Ethics,
15(1–2):
63–76.
Smith, Michael A. and Brant Leigh, 1997, “Virtual Subjects:
Using the Internet as an Alternative Source of Subjects and Research
Environment”,
Behavior Research Methods, Instruments, &
Computers
, 29(4): 496–505. doi:10.3758/BF03210601
Spriggs, Merle, 2010,
A Handbook for Human Research Ethics
Committees and Researchers: Understanding Consent in Research
Involving Children: The Ethical Issues
, Melbourne: The University
of Melbourne/Murdoch Childrens Research Institute/The Royal
Children’s Hospital Melbourne, version 4.
Spriggs 2010 available online
]
Stahl, Bernd Carsten and David Wright, 2018, “Ethics and
Privacy in AI and Big Data: Implementing Responsible Research and
Innovation”,
IEEE Security & Privacy
, 16(3):
26–33. doi:10.1109/MSP.2018.2701164
Sveningsson, Malin, 2004, “Ethics in Internet
Ethnography” in Buchanan 2004: 45–61.
Sweeney, Latanya, 2002, “K-Anonymity: A Model for Protecting
Privacy”,
International Journal of Uncertainty, Fuzziness
and Knowledge-Based Systems
, 10(5): 557–570.
doi:10.1142/S0218488502001648
Thomas, Jim, 2004, “Reexamining the Ethics of Internet
research: Facing the Challenge of Overzealous Oversight”, in
Johns, Chen, and Hall 2004: 187–201.
Thorseth, May (ed.), 2003,
Applied Ethics in Internet
Research
(Programme for Applied Ethics Publication Series No. 1),
Trondheim, Norway: NTNU University Press.
Tsai, Janice, Lorrie Faith Cranor, Alessandro Acquisti, and
Christina M. Fong, 2006, “What’s It To You? A Survey of
Online Privacy Concerns and Risks”. NET Institute Working Paper
No. 06–29. doi:10.2139/ssrn.941708
Turkle, Sherry,1997,
Life on the Screen: Identity in the Age
of the Internet
, New York: Touchstone.
Van Heerden, Alastair, Doug Wassenaar, Zaynab Essack, Khanya
Vilakazi, and Brandon A. Kohrt, 2020, “In-Home Passive Sensor
Data Collection and Its Implications for Social Media Research:
Perspectives of Community Women in Rural South Africa”,
Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics
,
15(1–2): 97–107. doi:10.1177/1556264619881334
Vitak, Jessica, Nicholas Proferes, Katie Shilton, and Zahra
Ashktorab, 2017, “Ethics Regulation in Social Computing
Research: Examining the Role of Institutional Review Boards”,
Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics
,
12(5): 372–382. doi:10.1177/1556264617725200
Walstrom, Mary K., 2004, “Ethics and Engagement in
Communication Scholarship: Analyzing Public, Online Support Groups as
Researcher/Participant-Experiencer”, in Buchanan 2004:
174–202.
Walther, Joseph B., 2002, “Research Ethics in
Internet-Enabled Research: Human Subjects Issues and Methodological
Myopia”,
Ethics and Information Technology
, 4(3):
205–216. doi:10.1023/A:1021368426115
White, Michele, 2002, “Representations or People?”,
Ethics and Information Technology
, 4(3): 249–266.
doi:10.1023/A:1021376727933
World Medical Association, 1964/2008, “Declaration of
Helsinki: Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human
Subjects”. Adopted by the 18
th
World Medical
Assembly. Amended 1975, 1983, 1989, 1996, 2000, 2002, 2004, 2008.
 [
Declaration of Helsinki available online
]
Wright, David R., 2006, “Research Ethics and Computer
Science: An Unconsummated Marriage”, in
Proceedings of the
24th Annual Conference on Design of Communication: SIGDOC
’06
, Myrtle Beach, SC: ACM Press, pp. 196–201.
doi:10.1145/1166324.1166369
Zimmer, Michael T., 2010, “‘But the Data Is Already
Public’: On the Ethics of Research in Facebook”,
Ethics and Information Technology
, 12(4): 313–325.
doi:10.1007/s10676-010-9227-5
–––, 2016, “OkCupid Study Reveals the
Perils of Big-Data Science”,
Wired.com
, 14 May 2016.
 [
Zimmer 2016 available online
]
Zimmer, Michael and Edward Chapman, 2020, “Ethical Review
Boards and Pervasive Data Research: Gaps and Opportunities”,
Paper presented at AoIR 2020: The 21st Annual Conference of the
Association of Internet Researchers.
 [
Zimmer and Chapman 2020 extended abstract available online (pdf)
]
Zimmer, Michael T. and Katharina Kinder-Kurlanda (eds.), 2017,
Internet Research Ethics for the Social Age: New Challenges,
Cases, and Contexts
, New York: Peter Lang Publishing.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Cited in Entry
Allan, Rob, 2012,
 “
Cloud and Web 2.0 Services for Supporting Research
”.
Chen, Xiaoyu, Gary Wills, Lester Gilbert, and David Bacigalupo,
2010, “Using Cloud for Research: A Technical Review”, JISC
Final Report for the TeciRes project.
 [
X. Chen et al. 2010 available online
]
Dittrich, David and Erin Kenneally, 2012,
The Menlo Report: Ethical Principles Guiding Information and Communication Technology Research
,
 Homeland Security, United States Government.
Hoofnagle, Chris Jay and Jennifer King, 2008, “What
Californians Understand About Privacy Online”, Research Report
from Samuelson Law Technology & Public Policy Clinic, UC Berkeley
Law: Berkeley, CA. doi:10.2139/ssrn.1262130
 [
Hoofnagle and King 2008 available online
]
[NHRPAC] National Human Subjects Protection Advisory Committee,
2002,
 “
Recommendations on Public Use Data Files
”.
[NIH] National Institutes of Health, 2010,
 “
Guide for Identifying and Handling Sensitive Information at the NIH
”
–––, 2021, “Certificates of Confidentiality (CoC)”, National Institutes of Health [
NIH 2021 available online
]
Rudder, Christian, 2014, “We Experiment on Humans!”,
OkTrends, 28 July 2014.
 [
Rudder 2014 available online
]
Sparks, Joel, 2002,
Timeline of Laws Related to the Protection of Human Subjects
,
 National Institutes of Health.
Stone, Brad, 2009, “Facebook Rolls Out New Privacy
Settings”,
New York Times
, 9 December 2009.
 [
Stone 2009 available online
]
U.K. Data Archive, 2011, “Managing and Sharing Data: Best
Practices for Researchers”.
 [
UK Data Archive available online
]
Williams, George, 2010,
 “
The Ethics of Amazon’s Mechanical Turk
”,
 ProfHacker Blog, The Chronicle of Higher Education, 1 March
2010.
Zimmer, Michael, 2009, “Facebook’s Privacy
Upgrade is a Downgrade for User
Privacy”, MichaelZimmer.Org.
 [
Zimmer 2009 available online
]
Laws and Government Documents
United States
Department of Health and Human Services, Code of Federal
Regulations [C.F.R.], United States
45 C.F.R. § 46, “Protection of Human Subjects”,
and in particular the Common Rule,
45 C.F.R. 46 Subpart A
45 C.F.R. § 164.514, “Other requirements relating to uses and disclosures of protected health information”
[OHRP] U.S Department of Health and Human Services, 2008,
“Office for Human Research Protections”,
 [
Office for Human Research Protection
]
The Belmont Report: Ethical Principles and Guidelines for the Protection of Human Subjects of Research
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: Can an electronic signature be used to document consent on parental permission?
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services: What are the basic elements of informed consent?
Elsewhere
Tri-Council Policy Statement: Ethical Conduct for Research Involving Humans
,
 Canada
European Parliament and Council of European Union (2016)
Regulation (EU) 2016/679. ... Data Protection Act 2018, c. 12
 [
Data Protection Act 2018 available online
]
Professional Standards
American Counseling Association: Ethics and Professional Standards
,
 2014 revision
American Psychological Association: Advisory Group on Conduction Research on the Internet
Association of Internet Researchers Ethics Guidelines
Journals, Forums, and Blogs
International Journal of Internet Science
Journal of Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics
Journal of Medical Internet Research
MethodSpace
,
 SAGE Publishing hosted.
Research Ethics Blog
,
 run by Nancy Walton.
Other Resources
Oral History: Defined
Research Ethics Guidelines for Internet Research (pdf)
,
 The (Norwegian) National Committee for Research Ethics in the Social
Sciences and the Humanities, 2003.
Forrester’s Global Data Protection and Privacy Heatmap
Council of European Social Science Data Archives (CESSDA)
Foundation Texts
of the learning module,
Current Issues in Research Ethics:
Privacy and Confidentiality
, Joyce Plaza and Ruth Fischbach,
Columbia University, New York: Columbia Center for New Media Teaching
& Learning.
Ethical and Legal Aspects of Human Subjects Research in Cyberspace
,
 American Association for the Advancement of Science.
Related Entries
ethics, biomedical: clinical research
|
ethics: deontological
|
informed consent
|
privacy