Jean Bodin
First published Fri Mar 25, 2005; substantive revision Mon Jul 30, 2018
Jean Bodin (1529/30–1596) was a lawyer, economist, natural
philosopher, historian, and one of the major political theorists of
the sixteenth century. There are two reasons why Bodin remains both
fascinating and enigmatic: on the one hand, aspects of his life remain
shrouded in legend; on the other, misunderstandings about his thought
and political positions have engendered contradictions and
discrepancies amongst historians which have been attributed mistakenly
to Bodin himself. His most significant work,
The Six Books of the
Commonwealth
(
Les Six livres de la République
,
1576), represents the sum total of legal and political thought of the
French Renaissance. His
Method for the Easy Comprehension of
History
(
Methodus ad facilem historiarum cognitionem
,
1566) is at the pinnacle of early-modern, European humanism’s
Ars
historica
. Finally, his work — if he was genuinely really
the author —
Colloquium of the Seven about Secrets of the
Sublime
(
Colloquium Heptaplomeres de rerum sublimium arcanis
abditis
, 1683), which was published posthumously, provides clues
about his own religious views.  Bodin’s spiritual beliefs did not
coincide with any official religion of his day, but instead resembled
a form of natural religion.
In this entry, we cite Bodin’s original works and their translations
by using abbreviations.  These abbreviations are defined in the first
two subsections of the Bibliography.  For example,
Methodus
will refer to the original work in Latin (
Methodus ad facilem
historiarum cognitionem
), while [Re] will refer to the
B. Reynolds 1945 translation of
Methodus
into English and
[Me] will refer to the P. Mesnard’s entire 1951 volume of French
translations.
1. Bodin’s Life in Politics and Religion: Concord or Tolerance?
2. Bodin’s Methodology of History and Law
3. Bodin’s religiosity:  Did He Believe or Not?
4. Bodin’s Politics: Sovereignty or Absolutism?
5. Culture of a Renaissance Man: Economics, Sorcery, Naturalism
5.1 Bodin’s theories on economics and finances
5.2 Theories on Demons
5.3 Naturalism
6. Justice for Bodin: Open and Closed Questions
6.1 Particular Questions
6.2 Open Questions
6.3 Closed questions
7. Publications, Conferences and Projects, 2013–2018
Bibliography
Works by Bodin Cited in the Text
Translations and Critical Editions Cited
Bibliographies
Editions of the
Commonwealth
Secondary Literature
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Bodin’s Life in Politics and Religion: Concord or Tolerance?
Jean Bodin was born near Angers between June 1529 and June 1530 to
Guillaume Bodin, a wealthy “master tailor,” and Catherine
Dutertre. Bodin studied in his hometown and while still young, took
the habit of the Carmelites and lived in the monastery of
Notre-Dames-des-Carmes. In 1545 he traveled to Paris with some of his
religious brothers to study philosophy under the tutelage of the
Carmelite Guillaume Prévost. The two years Bodin spent in
capital city were rich in intellectual and spiritual
experiences. In 1550 he
studied at the respected law faculty of the University of Toulouse
under the direction of Arnaud du Ferrier.
At the end of his studies in Toulouse, Bodin became the scientific
editor for the Latin translation (
Oppiani De venatione
, 1555)
from the Greek of Oppian of Apamea’s third-century treatise on
hunting.  In this work Bodin included a warm dedication to his
protector, Gabriel Bouvery, Bishop of Angers. In 1559, he published in Latin an
Address to the Senate and People of Toulouse on the Education of
Youth in the Commonwealth
(
Oratio de instituenda in republica
juventute ad senatum populumque Tolosatem
, 1559).  Here Bodin
praises humanism and calls for it to be taught in the public schools.
According to Bodin, if humanism were included in the cultural
education the youth received, the political and religious harmony of
the State would be strengthened (
Oratio
25):
I maintain that there may be no law so sacred and divine that could
better reinforce the social ties of the city than a common and
identical education for all children. Even in spiritual matters, it
enables the realization of the most perfect harmony of convictions
between all citizens (
summa conspiratione civium
). However,
if the role of ecclesiastical leaders is to ensure that the true
religion (
religo vera
) is not stained by superstition or
impiety, it is also the role of the magistrates, who hold the reins of
the State, to ensure that the youth do not forsake the one, unchanging
religion to follow other, diverse beliefs (
ab una et eadem
religione in varias distrahatur
). In this manner we may conserve
the semblance of a State. [trans. by the 
 author]
[
1
]
One education for all citizens and one religion for all the faithful
were Bodin’s conditions for civil agreement and cooperation within a
State. Cultural and religious diversity were to be avoided. These
ideas remained important themes throughout his life.
In 1560 Bodin returned to Paris where he was received by the
Parlement as “Counsel to the king.” In 1562 he signed the
oath of Catholicity that was required by the Chapter of Notre Dame of
Paris as of November 15, 1561. At the beginning of the civil wars,
Bodin wrote a letter to Jean Bautru of Matras, a counselor in the
Parlement of Paris who was also attracted to evangelical ideas. In the
letter, Bodin believed that the “true faith” was the cause of the
civil conflict that afflicted France. Nevertheless he added that there
was no better proof of Christianity’s truth than that “human
forces conspire against it. If religion can be considered as the
grounds and cause of wars, then those wars may be like a caring doctor
who cannot heal a deep-seated disease without causing great pain or
provoking much moaning from the patient.” Thus, Constantine
struggled against the tyrants for the “Christian
religion,” and before him Moses and Judas Macchabee fought
against superstition (
Lettre Bautru
, [Ro] 79–80).  Bodin’s
opinion on this subject is contained in a brief document in which he
is less concerned to discuss the causes of the current war than he is
to describe the distinguishing characteristics of his faith.  The
sages of antiquity and the Christian era, he recalls, all
distinguished themselves through their high morals and piety.
In 1566 Bodin published
Method for the Easy Comprehension
of History
(
Methodus
).  In this work Bodin developed
his conception of universal, historical knowledge.  Not only did
historical and juridical knowledge enable the proper management and
government of the State, but also rendered the State’s forms and
changes (
conversiones
) intelligible.
Bodin continually surprises readers with the wide range of his
knowledge. For example in his
Response to the Paradoxes of
Monsieur de Malestroit
(
Response
, 1568), he explains
his views on economic and financial matters. His theses on free trade,
the benefits of exportation, and the error of establishing the value
of money through royal decree regardless of the laws of the market,
were unexpected by his contemporaries. His reputation grew along with
his interest in public life and the problems of the realm. Also in
1568, he attended the Estates of Narbonne, possibly as an envoy for
the central government. In 1570, he became the
gruyer
and
prosecutor for the king in a commission for the forests of
Normandy. During a debate on the ancient, royal right to collect
tithes on the sale of forests, Bodin opposed the tithes and the
sale. He considered both as forms of alienation; the king was only a
common user of forests that actually belonged to the people. King
Charles IX ignored Bodin’s objections and issued an edict in 1571
alienating his rights. Regardless of this tension with the king, Bodin
became the “master of petitions” and counselor to the
king’s youngest brother, François-Hercule, who was then the
Duke of Alençon. On August 8, 1573, Bodin was in Metz as a
member of the delegation that received the ambassadors of Poland, who
came to offer their country’s crown to the king’s brother Henry, Duke
of Anjou. The Bishop and Duke of Langres, Charles des Cars, welcomed
the ambassadors in a speech delivered in Latin. Bodin immediately
translated the speech into French (
La Harangue
, 1573). On
this occasion, Bodin contacted the negotiators who favored Henry’s
election to the Polish throne, including the Bishop of Valence, Jean
de Monluc, and the State Counselor, Guy Du Faur de Pibrac.  Bodin had
known de Pibrac for many years, and Bodin later dedicated his
Commonwealth
to him. These contacts favored Bodin’s entry
into the court of Henry, King of Poland, who also became King of
France in 1574. In the meantime, Bodin’s social situation improved
thanks to his marriage to Françoise Trouilliart on February 25,
1576. After the marriage, he succeeded his recently deceased
brother-in-law, Nicolas Trouilliart to the position of the king’s
prosecutor at the
présidial
of Laon.
The year 1576 was central in Bodin’s life; in that year he published
his
Six Books of the Commonwealth
(
République
). In this monumental work Bodin tries to
restore the institutional bases of the French kingdom, which the
on-going war threatened to undermine on account of, among other
things, the Reformers’ doctrine concerning tyranny and tyrannicide.
For example, Bodin writes (
République
I, 8)
about certain authors of slander and treatises:
…those who have written on the duties of
 magistrates
[
2
]
and other similar
 books
[
3
]
are wrong to support the idea that the Estates of the People [Estates
General] are more important than the prince. Such ideas make obedient
subjects revolt when they should obey their sovereign prince
[…] These notions are absurd (
absurdes
) and incompatible
(
incompatibles
). [trans. by the author; cf.[Mc] 95]
In describing these doctrines as “absurd and
incompatible,” Bodin levels a harsh critique and lays the basis
for his response in his
Six Books of the Commonwealth
. Bodin
supported the right of resistance in general, but he opposed the right
“to take up arms.” Armed resistance was a tactic that the
“Huguenots” claimed as a right, especially after the
ravages of the St. Bartholomew’s Day Massacre. But 1576 was equally
important in the history of France: after the king issued the Edict of
Beaulieu (Paix de Monsieur) on May 6 and convened the Estates General
in Blois, the wars of religion briefly subsided. In the royal edict,
next to the words “those followers of the so-called Reformed
Religion,” a distinction is made between “United”
Catholics or the “Union of Catholics,” and the
“associated” Catholics. The associated Catholics comprised
the Duke of Montmorency and other supporters of
François-Hercule, the current Duke of Anjou and Alençon,
as well as the Catholics who had signed the
Act of
Association
in 1575 with a party of moderate
 Huguenots.
[
4
]
The United Catholics was an association of Catholic nobles that allied
with Duke Henry of Guise, advocated the reunification of the faith,
and strove towards religious concord in
France.
[
5
]
Leagues
and associations formed on both sides of the religious and political
spectrum until France became more and more divided.
At the same time, Bodin’s authority as an expert in affairs of
State was growing. By the end of November 1576, he was received at
court and sometimes dined with the king in order to discuss the most
current events. Elected as the deputy of Vermandois, Bodin was sent
officially to the Estates General of Blois. He recorded the
proceedings of the meeting in his journal (
Recueil
, 1577).
After attaining the presidency of the deputies of the Third Estate,
Bodin revealed his unbending support for the interests of the
“people.” Beginning with the meetings held in the middle
of February 1577 in Blois, he refused to compromise with the clergy
and nobility who desired to review the
Cahiers des
États
in order to render the Third Estate the
minority. Bodin’s haughty remarks jeopardized his position in the eyes
of the king. Moreover he was firmly opposed to two royal petitions for
subsidies as well as the perpetual alienation of crown territory,
which he considered the “property of the people.” This
resistance to royal power in matters of financial politics went hand
in hand with his resistance in matters of religious politics. Bodin
wanted to see an end to the religious wars. Totally convinced of the
need for religious concord in order to facilitate political
unification, he was willing to accept temporary measures of toleration
until religious reunification could be achieved through the meeting of
“a national or general council to resolve matters of
religion” which was slated to be held “two years
later.” In opposition to propositions made by Versoris (Pierre
Le Tourneur), a fierce member of the League who supported violent
means, Bodin was in agreement with the majority of the Third Estate
whose deputies concluded that “the majority of voices will
implore the king by written request, to unite his subjects in a
Catholic, apostolic, and Roman religion by all holy and legitimate
means without war.” Here, in two lines, was the essence of
Bodin’s program of concord—not permanent religious
tolerance. In the meantime, on January 6, 1577, Henry III had revoked
the recent Edict of Beaulieu, and declared that he would no longer
tolerate the “so-called Reformed religion” in his realm.
Instead he would allow only the Catholic religion in France. At the
same time, he took charge of the League or the Catholic Union.
The tensions with the sovereign did not advance Bodin’s career. He
had to content himself for the time being as the royal prosecutor at
the
présidial
of Laon, where he planned to retire. His
studies and intellectual work increased and in 1578 he published
Exposition of Universal Law
(
Juris
), a small
methodic textbook in which his theory of universal rights completes
his vision of universal history that he had developed earlier in the
Method
. His work on judicial and historical research received
not only praise, but also criticism, often harsh, which malicious
readers heaped on him. For example, Michel of La Serre published a
Remonstrance au Roi sur les pernicieux discours contenus au livre
de la République de Bodin
in 1579 that accused Bodin of
attempting to diminish the sovereignty of the king and of defending,
without being explicit, the Huguenots. This was exactly the opposite
of what Bodin was trying to accomplish in his published works. On the
other hand, the second accusation—the secretive membership in
the Reformed religion—has found favor today amongst some modern
biographers who attribute this membership to Bodin as a badge of
honor.  Bodin, knowing well that these two accusations were unfounded
did not deem it necessary to respond to his slanderer,
le sieur de
La Serre
, who in the meantime had been imprisoned on orders of
the king. But serious and reasoned opposition to Bodin’s work was also
not lacking. Professor Andreas Franckenberger did not accept the
arguments that Bodin leveled against the ideas of Sleidan and
Melanchthon concerning the Old Testament book of 
Daniel.
[
6
]
They had posited that
according to Daniel’s theory of the “four monarchies” the
monarchy following Holy Roman Empire was destined to rule the
world. Pierre de l’Hostal disputed Bodin’s effort to reduce, through
mathematic formulae, the number of government 
types.
[
7
]
As for Bodin’s friend,
the medical doctor Augier Ferrier of Toulouse, he also challenged the
numerology with which Bodin attempted to forecast governmental
change.
[
8
]
In
response to Ferrier and other detractors, Bodin took up the pen not
only to defend himself but also to attack his critics in his work
Defense of Jean Bodin by René Herpin
(
Apologie
, 1581).
Bodin’s critics became more serious and dangerous with regard to
his
On the Demon-mania of Witches
that was published in 1581
(
Démonomanie
). In his letter of dedication (December
20, 1579) to Christophle de Thou, the first president of the Parlement
of Paris, Bodin explains why he write the work and the meaning of its
title. First, he hoped to denounce the mania, the spiritual errors,
and distraction, as well as the “fury” that sorcerers
possess as they “chase after the devil.” He wrote this
treaty with two purposes in mind: on the one hand, “to use it as
a warning to all who will see him [the devil],” and on the other
hand, “to alert readers that there is no crime that could be
more atrocious or deserve more serious punishment.” Bodin wished
to speak out against those who “try by all means to rescue the
sorcerers through printed books.” He reminded all that
“Satan has men in his grasp who write, publish, and speak
claiming that nothing that is said about sorcerers is true.” It
was essential to provide the tools to magistrates and judges, who were
confronted by the accused sorcerers, in order to face this formidable
problem. The work was bold and perilous for its author. Many wondered
if Bodin, so curious about this topic, such an expert, so convinced of
the devil’s existence, may not himself have been involved with
witchcraft. These suspicions alarmed the authorities, and on June 3,
1587, the general prosecutor to the Parlement of Paris ordered the
general lieutenant of the baillage of Laon to proceed with a search of
Bodin’s home, on suspicion of witchcraft. This inspection brought no
results due to the intervention of eight prominent citizens and two
priests who registered their support of Bodin.
In the 1580s, Bodin’s diplomatic responsibilities were reduced at
the same time that the prestige of the Duke of Alençon and
Anjou, whom Bodin had accompanied on a voyage to England and Flanders,
diminished. After the Duke’s unsuccessful attempt to seize Antwerp,
Bodin wrote to his brother-in-law, Nicolaus Trouilliart, on January
22, 1583 and explained his useless efforts to dissuade the duke from
such an undertaking. The death of Duke François-Hercule, the
youngest brother of the king, raised dynastic problems: the
presumptive heir, Henry of Navarre, was the leader of the Huguenots,
and he was related to Henri III to the 22
nd
degree. Facing
the eventuality of a “heretic” king, the League took the
upper hand, and the Catholics strengthened their Holy Union. The
“perpetual and irrevocable” Edict of Paris (called the
Peace of Nemour) on July 7, 1585 prohibited the exercise of the
reformed cult, and effectively revoked the Edict of Poitiers of the
September 17, 1577 (also “perpetual and irrevocable”),
which had conceded a slight, provisory measure of tolerance. The edict
of 1585 was confirmed by the Edict of Rouen of July 1588 and was
moreover defined as the “inviolable and fundamental law.”
In other words, religious concord, in this case “forced”
concord, represented the highest priority for the lawmakers. There are
two sorts of religious edicts that alternate during the wars: edicts
of pacification and provisional tolerance, and edicts of concord and
union.  In the “edicts of pacification,” which Bodin
believed were the best means to avoid war, temporary tolerance takes
precedence while final peace is delayed until a time when “God
will grant us the grace to unite the nation in the same fold.”
“Edicts of Union” or “Uniformity” (this was
the word preferred by the Kings of England in their
Acts of
Uniformity
) imposed peace through force and thereby implied that
war could begin again. The Estates General of Blois sanctioned, on
October 18, 1588, The Edict of Rouen as “the fundamental and
irrevocable law of this kingdom.” The crisis reached its peak
during a quick succession of events that shook the kingdom.  First, on
December 23 and 24, 1588, the leader of the Catholics, Henry of
Lorraine [third Duke of Guise], and his younger brother, Louis de
Lorraine, Cardinal of Guise and Archbishop of Reims, were assassinated
on the orders Henry III. Second, in January 1589, the Parlement of
Paris denounced this “massacre,” and the theology faculty
of the Sorbonne freed subjects from their oath of faithfulness and
obedience to the king.  Finally on August 1, 1589, Jacques
Clément, believing that he was killing a tyrant, assassinated
the king. On August 4, 1589, Henry of Navarre claimed that he was
willing to “be instructed” in order to return to the
Catholic faith. The reality was such that, while the parties fought to
claim the throne, the kingdom was without a king and the royalist
party, which included Bodin, without a leader. During this period,
Bodin, as a public figure, as the man responsible for the city of
Laon, as a well-known authority on constitutional rights, and as a
private citizen, was obligated to define publicly his political
positions.
The
Letter by Jean Bodin in which he discuss the reasons why he
became a member of the League
(
Lettre Bodin
), of January
20, 1590, published in Paris, Lyons, Toulouse, and Brussels, is
clearly a masterpiece of political analysis once it is properly framed
within its historical context. The work continues to be discussed and
disparaged by historians and biographers of Bodin. Bodin explains why
“the inhabitants or most of them” of Laon, including
himself, became members of the “League.” Three factors
played a role: first, article 9 of the 1588 Edict of the Union order
all subjects to “join the current union” under the threat
of being judged guilty of
lèse majesté
; second was the fear that
“a regiment of Captain Bourg” would loot the town; third,
assassination attempts had been launched against him [Bodin], from
which he had barely escaped.  Some would say that Bodin was forced to
change his political position, but this is not the case; rather, great
changes had occurred in the historical reality.  Many, but not
all, of the royalists (“regalists”) found themselves
without a king or a party, turned toward the League as the group with
the most similar agenda—the program of concord. In effect, the
royalists and the League had had similar views regarding concord, the
survival of political institutions, and the Gallic State. They
disagreed however about the means to achieve their objectives, most
notably how quickly to go to war against the Huguenots, the excessive
power of the Duke de Guise (which diminished the authority of the
king) and the interference of the pope and Spain. On these points
Bodin, as a loyal officer of the king, kept his distance from the
League. At that time the changes were so distressing that Bodin
believed it was necessary to explain publicly the new circumstances in
which France and the French found themselves. Only with these new
circumstances in mind should Bodin’s response be evaluated. He himself
did not question the changes because all that mattered for him was
that he continued to serve the people whose well-being was “the
supreme law.” Bodin’s continuing loyal service reveals his
position. He had considered all of the matters carefully because he
believed he would face “the judgment of God,” concerning
his own actions as well as those of France. If the town should fall
“into the hands of enemy [clearly the Huguenots],” Bodin
wrote that he would worry neither for his life nor his goods,
“as long as I [he] could serve the public.”
Examining the general situation of the warring factions, Bodin
expresses himself frankly.  He knew how to judge one of the most
complex moments in French history clearly and without partisanship. By
analyzing how he reaches his opinions, we can better understand his
ideas. The prospects for a peace agreement were small because
“the leaders and the partisans were, whether in the State or the
Church, at odds in their morals, behavior, and inclinations. They
absolutely cannot agree by speaking together.” Besides, the two
parties were powerful internally and externally.  The Maréchaux
of France, the main officers of the crown, the second estate of the
nobility all of the Huguenots, “politiques” and atheists
and nearly all of the princes of the blood belonged to the party of
the King of Navarre. Thus, in Bodin’s view, the “politiques and
atheists” were linked to the reformed, which he considered the
enemy. Outside of the kingdom, they were even more powerful and
counted in their alliance: England, Scotland, Denmark, Sweden, the
four Swiss cantons, and the Protestant princes of Germany. Addressing
the party of the Holy Union, Bodin eulogized its leader, the Duke of
Mayenne [Charles of Lorraine, the third son of Duke François de
Guise and brother of the deceased Duke Henry], “whom it seems
that God has appointed to be the Protector of Religion and the
State.” In this circumstance, “this good leader, in
addition to the public interest, can rightly pursue vengeance for his
two brothers.  Unfortunately he received bad advice from those who
today carry arms and who belong to the opposing party.” This
clause reveals much about Bodin’s opinion regarding the assassination
of the Guises by Henry III, whom, Bodin believed, had been ill advised
by the Huguenots. The Catholic party was strong in France, having on
its side all of the clergy, all of the capital cities (except for
Bordeaux), nearly all of the provinces, and 150 “good
towns.” Abroad, the Catholics could call on the assistance of
the “Pope and the Holy See, Chief of the Union,” the
emperor and Catholic King “whom we can call, without flattery,
the greatest prince carrying the title of king in Christendom over the
past 150 years.” This list does not count other Catholic powers
including the Dukes of Savoy, Florence, Ferrara, and Mantua, the
Catholic Princes of Germany, and the three Elector Archbishops. As far
as the right of succession, according to his calculations, forecasts,
the study of numbers, and degrees of relationship (to the thirteenth
degree for the Cardinal of Bourbon, Charles, brother of Antoine of
Bourbon—King of Navarre, father of Henry—and to the
fourteenth degree for the present King of Navarre, Henry) Bodin had no
doubt that the Cardinal of Bourbon had a better claim than the King of
Navarre.  “Therefore, the King of Navarre, however good and
clever the advice he may have, is, in my judgment, ill-advised when he
does not recognize Monseigneur the Cardinal of Bourbon as king.”
Had he been better advised, Henry should have freed his uncle, whom he
was keeping in captivity, and allowed him to govern until succeeding
him.  Therefore, “he should stop this belligerence and contract
an alliance with the House of Lorraine, by freeing the innocent Duke
of Guise, [Charles of Lorraine, fourth Duke of Guise and eldest son of
the deceased] and the Duke of Elbeuf, [Charles of Lorraine, count of
Harcourt] who is being punished unjustly.” Bodin demonstrates
his political acumen here not so much concerning the forecasts he
makes based on numerology ( he repeats “I foresee,” three
or four times) but for the recommendations he makes to the King of
Navarre before ascending the throne. First he writes that the King of
Navarre should be reconciled with the Catholic Church, which Navarre
had already announced. Second, he should give the throne to his uncle,
Charles de Bourbon, which given that Charles was sixty-seven at the
time and died in May 1590, would have been a temporary arrangement.
Henry did not do this.  Third, he should have sought an agreement
between the Lorraines or the Guises and the other Catholic princes.
Navarre does this before and after he is crowned Henry IV. These
recommendations prove Bodin’s clear political judgment.
Here we see a relatively little-known side to Bodin which
nevertheless is consistent with the principles he had outlined in his
Six Books of the Commonwealth
. His advice is perceptive and
objective; however, historians have glossed over this fact in order to
depict Bodin as a man who should have been ashamed of joining the Holy
Union. Yet Bodin was secure in his judgment, when he wrote 
(
Lettre Bodin
):
You now see, sir, that the Union’s case is better founded than you
thought […] I see that everywhere men are making great efforts
to assist it. I beg God to give you grace. ([Ro] 92–93; trans. by the author).
The victory of the Union would assure religious concord and the
re-establishment of the institutions of the kingdom. This was Bodin’s
wish and this is precisely what the Catholic and “very Christian
King,” Henry IV, later brought to fruition through the Edict of
Nantes of 1598. Nowadays, the generally accepted opinion that regards
the Edict of Nantes as a “perpetual and irrevocable” law
of permanent tolerance (or coexistence of two religions) is erroneous.
This judicial measure was intended to restore the social and political
cohesion of the realm in the short term.  In the long term it was
aimed at religious reunification in the one sole faith—that of
the king.  That is why the Edict was defined as a “law of
concord,” through temporary tolerance. This was the
authoritative judgment of Pierre de Beloy, the sole contemporary
jurist and commentator of the
 Edict.
[
9
]
Bodin did not live to see it. He died of the plague between June and
September 1596, after having declared in his testament that he wished
to be buried in the church of the Franciscans of Laon.
In his last years, Bodin occupied himself with two projects. The
first,
Colloquium of the Seven about Secrets of the Sublime
,
concerned the essence of religion.  If indeed it was from Bodin’s hand
(and its attribution to him has as many partisans as it has its
critics, as we shall see), it would have been written in these final
years of his life. The work would be published long after his death
(
Heptaplomeres
, 1683). The other,
Theater of Universal
Nature
(
Theatrum
, 1596), dealt with natural philosophy.
He had just enough time to add a dedicatory letter to Jacques Mitte,
Count of Miolins on March 1, 1596.
2. Bodin’s Methodology of History and Law
When he began his research, Bodin was drawn to analysis and
systematics as methods for organizing knowledge. In titling his work
“Method”, he gave a new and definitive meaning to a word
which previous authors had used to signify both “division”
and “
ratio
” or “the procedure” for
learning a
 discipline.
[
10
]
In
Method
, Bodin encourages his readers to use analysis,
which he calls “that pre-eminent guide to the teaching of the
arts […] in order that understanding of history
(
historiarum scientia
) shall be complete and facile”
(
Methodus
, [Re] 20; Latin [Me] 116).  According to Bodin, it
is through analysis that one is able to divide universals into parts,
and to divide each part into subsections without losing the coherence
of the whole. Therefore synthesis, he states, is no longer necessary
because the individual episodes of nearly all historical accounts are
already well adapted to each other
,
and the best historians
have carefully reconstructed these partial and regional accounts into
the tableau of universal history. Bodin writes (
Methodus
[Me]
116):
I call that history universal which embraces the affairs of all, or of
the most famous peoples, or of those whose deeds in war and in peace
have been handed down to us from an early stage of their national
growth ([Re] 21).
Bodin ascribes a unique role to political
knowledge, thereby distinguishing his writings from many similar
treatments of the
ars historica
which were published at the
end of the fifteenth
 century.
[
11
]
The masterpieces of this genre were produced in Italy such as
Francesco Patrizi,
Della historia dialoghi dece
, 1560; and in
France by François Bauduin,
De institutione historiae
universae et ejus cum jurisprudentia conjunctione
, Paris
1561. Although he does not cite Bauduin, Bodin was indebted to this
French author who was the first to describe in a scientific manner the
multiple connections between law and universal history. The chapter
headings include:
What History is and of How Many Categories
The Order of Reading Historical Treatises
The Proper Arrangement of Historical Material
The Choice of Historians
The Correct Evaluation of Histories
The Type of Government in States
Refutation of those who Postulate Four Monarchies and the Golden Age
A System of Universal Time
Criteria by which to Test the Origins of Peoples
The Order and Collection of
  Historians
[
12
]
For Bodin, methodologies were visual representations of systems of
knowledge.  He makes this point in his work
Exposition
, where
he states that the concept of “division,” which Plato had
called divine, is the “universal rule of the sciences” (See also
Juris
, 1578).  If history is divided into divine history,
natural history, and human history, then law can be divided into
natural law, human law, the laws of nations, public law, and civil
law. From there, Bodin briefly describes and defines legal matters
including: contracts, crimes, property, obligation, authority,
jurisdiction, etc. Here more than in the
Method
, the reader
sees Bodin’s pedagogical preoccupation with brevity and
conciseness. The work is also illustrated with a number of schematic
tables. In the private sphere, Bodin demonstrated his talent for
teaching in
A Letter to his Nephew
(
Épître
, 1585), and in the short
Advice on
the Education of a Prince
(
Conseil
, 1574–1586),
which had limited circulation.
3. Bodin’s religiosity:  Did He Believe or Not?
During his youth, Bodin received a Catholic education and he
remained loyal to the Church until his death. Demonstrating his
religious convictions, in a testament from June 7, 1596, he requested
to be buried in a Catholic Church. Nevertheless, during his middle
years, he was critical of the church hierarchy and occasionally
expressed antipapal sentiments. On the basis of this evidence, his
biographers have quickly labeled him a Protestant. Yet in his
Lettre à Jean Bautru des Matras
, a text based on his
youthful religious ideas, it is clear that Bodin was not a pure
Protestant, but rather a critic of the Roman Catholic clergy, its
hierarchy, and some of its doubtful religious practices.  Bodin was a
fervent believer in the “true religion” which he
considered “nothing other than looking to God with a purified
 spirit.”
[
13
]
These words reveal less a reformed Calvinist than an adherent of a
belief system, whose orthodoxy was unclear, but which could be
described as natural religion. Bodin possessed an expansive view of
religion and a sincere belief in an all-powerful God. If he did agree
with some Protestants who criticized the traditional Catholic
teachings on such matters as the “veneration of images of the
saints, the adoration of the Eucharist, and the belief in the fires of
purgatory,” Bodin did not hold God responsible for these errors
as certain sects did (e.g., the Epicureans, although the allusion is
not clear).
This would be the equivalent to calling God a trickster
(
sceleratum
) for allowing, during the millennia before
Christ, all men, except the seven thousand (as stated by the divine
Word), to live in the most despicable evilness. This would be
 absurd. (
Lettre Bautru
, [Ro] 81).
In this letter Bodin refrained from all commentary on the doctrine of
the sacraments and dogma. Instead he considered the religion of
Christ, to which he himself belonged (
mea vel potius Christi
religio
), as accessible to all men of good will. This included
the luminaries of the ancient world, most notably the Platonists, whom
Bodin considered “close to being Christians.” His words,
although far from being those of an adherent of the Reformation, are
no less those of a critic of the papal curia an advocate of reform
within the Catholic Church who was calling for a return to the
essential, pure message of the Gospels. On the other hand, amongst
fervent Catholics, Bodin’s views on the freedom of
 conscience
[
14
]
caused him to be suspect, even though his opinions on the freedom of
the conscience was distinct from his theory of religious tolerance
(the first was a matter for the private individual, the second for
civil and public life).  According to one contemporary in Bodin’s city
of Laon, Antoine Richart, Bodin was “a politique and a dangerous
Catholic” (Richart 1869, 68; cited in Chauviré 1914, 80).  A
later writer, Traiano Boccalini, labeled Bodin a “notorious
atheist” because he had recommended the “the freedom of
conscience” (Boccalini 1618, I, 64, p. 195).
The
Heptaplomeres
, written around 1593, appeared
posthumously (Kiel, 1683). Here the author gives us evidence of his
religious beliefs (presuming, for the moment, that Bodin was, in fact,
the author). The seven speakers in the work represent as many
different religions, confessions, and philosophical schools of
thought: Coroni, Catholicism; Salomon, Judaism; Senamy, Skepticism;
Octavus, a renegade turned Muslim; Friedrich, Lutheranism; Curtius,
Calvinism; and Toralbe, natural religion. Toralbe often, but not
always, seems to represent the author’s personal beliefs. Despite
their diversity, the seven agree with the prohibition against publicly
disputing the fundamentals of religion since “all matters that
are disputed are immediately called into doubt.” They also agree
that the freedom of conscience should be respected, because “one
should not be constrained in matters of religion, and beliefs should
be voluntarily embraced, not imposed” as Tertullian stated.  On
the other hand, the speakers differ on the freedom of worship. Even
Curtius, the Calvinist, admits that “the desire to allow several
religions to practice openly in the same city seems to me to be one of
the most problematic issues in the world.” Although the author
deliberately leaves this discussion open and without a definite
conclusion, the dialogue hinges on the thoughts of Toralbe who states
that “the laws of Nature and natural religion, which nature
inspires in the heart, are sufficient for salvation.” The
theologian Johann Diecmann refuted Bodin’s
Heptaplomeres
in
his thesis,
De naturalismo tum aliorum, tum maxime
J. Bodini
(Diecmann 1683). But beginning with Leibniz, the
Heptaplomeres
has not ceased to attract the attention of
scholars on account of its outstanding erudition and the depth of the
questions it addresses.
His antipapal sentiments, interspersed throughout his writings,
have provided historians with evidence to label Bodin a
Protestant. Nevertheless, his criticisms of the Catholic Church should
not be taken as signs of Bodin’s adherence to the Reformed creed since
the same views were expressed by a number of important jurists,
theologians, and writers of the period; many of whom held an active
interest in the new evangelical ideas. Some would later return to
traditional Christianity. Their Catholicism may not have conformed to
the orthodoxy of Rome, but it was similar to the reformist program of
the Erasmian School (see, for example, the cases of Charles Du Moulin,
François Bauduin, Claude d’Espence, George Cassander, Jean de
Monluc, and others). Moreover, Bodin’s attacks on the papal curia did
not escape the scrutiny of the ecclesiastical authorities. The
official censure of the Church placed the
Methodus
(1583,
1591),
République
(1591),
Démonomanie
(1594), and the
Theatrum
(1628), on the Index of prohibited
books.
4. Bodin’s Politics: Sovereignty or Absolutism?
Bodin’s major work, the
Six Books of the Commonwealth
, is
a treatment of “political science,” a term which Bodin
justly claimed he has coined.  The books are titled:
The Final End of the Well-ordered Commonwealth
Of the Different Kinds of Commonwealth
The Council
The Rise and Fall of Commonwealths
The Order to be Observed in Adapting the Form of the
 Commonwealth to the Diverse Condition of Men and the Means of
Determining their Dispositions
The Census and the Censorship.
Bodin’s primary contribution to political science of his day is his
definition of sovereignty.  Sovereignty, he contends, has an impact
upon both the internal affairs of the State (such as in its exercise
of full political power) as well as its external affairs (such as in
its conduct of war and international relations). “Majesty or
sovereignty is the most high, absolute, and perpetual power over the
citizens and subjects in a Commonwealth, which the Latins call
Majestas
” (République, I, 8 [Mc] 84). Bodin’s
discussion of tyrannicide is consistent with his political theory. For
instance, while he states that there are instances when tyrannicide is
justified (for example against tyrannical usurpers), killing a prince
presumed to be a tyrant is forbidden if “the prince is an
absolute sovereign.” Bodin explains (
République
II, 5):
If the prince is an absolute sovereign, as are the true kings of
France, Spain, England, Scotland, Ethiopia, Turkey, Persia and
Muscovy, whose authority is unquestionably their own, and not shared
with any of their subjects, then it is in no circumstances permissible
either by any of their subjects in particular, or in general, to
attempt anything against the life and honor of their king, either
by process of law or force of arms, even though he has committed all
the evil, impious and cruel deeds imaginable. (see [To] and [Mc] 222)
Bodin paid particular attention to differentiating between the forms
of State and the forms of government.  For instance he defined a
monarchy as the rule of one; aristocracy as the rule of a few; and
democracy as the rule by all people. Yet monarchies might still be
democracies according to Bodin, if the prince allows all of the people
to have access to magistracies and State offices without regard for
nobility, wealth, or virtue. Otherwise, a monarchy can be a form of
aristocracy if the prince bestows State responsibilities only to the
most noble, the richest, or the most virtuous. The same observations
hold true for aristocratic and popular regimes.
The distinctions between the forms of State and the forms of
government are essential for understanding the differences between
royal monarchies, despotic monarchies, and tyrannical monarchies. The
last two are easily confused.  Bodin writes
(
République
II, 2):
Despotic monarchy must not be confused with tyranny. There is nothing
unfitting in a prince who has defeated his enemies in a good and just
war, assuming an absolute right to their possessions and their persons
under the laws of war, and thereafter governing them as his slaves;
just as the head of a household is the master of his slaves and their
goods, and disposes of them as he thinks fit, under the law of
nations. But the prince who by an unjust war, or any other means,
enslaves a free people and seizes their property is not a despot but a
tyrant.  (see [To]; cf. [Mc] 201)
The difference between despotism and tyranny is crucial.  Despotism
is legitimate and sometimes legal.  Tyranny, on the other hand, is
always illegitimate, illegal, and contrary to natural and divine laws.
Therefore Bodin demonstrates that he is in process of constructing his
theory of sovereignty not that of despotism. The same can be observed
concerning absolute monarchies. When Bodin used the adjective
“absolute” to define a sovereign, he did so as a Romanist,
and as an historian of Roman law for whom the word
absolutus
was linked to
legibus solutus
—the prerogative of the
one who is sovereign. One must pay close attention to Bodin’s writing
to understand his concept of “absolute.” For Bodin a
sovereign is “not bound” (
absolutus
) by the civil
or positive laws which he or his predecessors had
promulgated. Nevertheless a sovereign is always bound to natural and
divine law.  Sovereignty, according to Bodin, is as supreme as one
wishes, but is also limited by natural and divine law.  The Kings of
France were glorious because their sovereignty was limited by divine
and natural law (cf.
Methodus
, [Me] 208–209).  Unfortunately,
with the introduction of the word “absolutism” in the
nineteenth century, historians of political philosophy began to
consider Bodin as a theoretician of absolutism. This is a tendency
that continues even today.  In so doing, some historians have ascribed
a doctrine to Bodin that was foreign to him. Instead Bodin
systematized and defined a theory of sovereignty. But this problem
of historical interpretation depends on the methodology and on the
synchronic and diachronic perspective: when historians do not compare
Bodin to Machiavelli, they study often Bodin in comparison to those
who came after him: Grotius, Althusius, Locke, and particularly
Hobbes, Montesquieu and Rousseau. Nothing should stop the historian
from making such comparisons as long as it is not his or her sole
method of analysis. As all historians understand, in order to fully
and accurately understand an author, it is necessary to place his work
squarely within the context and debates of his historical
period. Therefore one should judge and interpret Bodin based on the
works, sources, and documents current in his century rather than on
those that would appear in the future.
5. Culture of a Renaissance Man: Economics, Sorcery, Naturalism
5.1 Bodin’s theories on economics and finances
In 1566, M. de Malestroict, master of accounts on the making of
money, published his work,
Paradoxes
, to demonstrate that
contrary to popular opinion in France, real prices had not risen over
the past three centuries.  In other words, the value of money had
remained proportional to the amount of gold and silver it
contained. For example, concerning inflation, Malestroict posited that
although the price of land and property may have increased since the
reign of St. Louis IX, inflation was not the culprit.  Instead he
believed that it was the decreasing amount of gold and silver which
the money contained that caused prices to rise. Malestroict was
convinced, following the opinions of the time, that gold and silver
were representative values that were not influenced by the
fluctuations of world markets.  Also, while the price of various items
might increase, the items were worth a constant amount of gold or
silver which did not fluctuate. Because wealth is judged by the
quantity of money, “the metals are the true and fair judges of
market value or the price of items.”
Bodin refuted this argument and concentrated on the question of the
abundance of gold and silver which he considered the principal and
singular cause for the high prices of his era. “Previously no
one had offered such an argument,” he says. In this matter he
added two other secondary causes for high prices: the monopolies of
merchants and craftsmen, who gathered in guilds and confraternities to
establish the price of goods according to their own whims, as well as
the scarcity of luxury goods. According to Bodin, war was another
cause of rising prices: it creates shortages and therefore causes
goods to become more expensive.  Bodin posited that the solution to
this lay in ending conflicts, since then the parties could occupy
themselves with trade amongst themselves rather than waging war. In
his opinion on the relationship between money and the price of goods,
Bodin advocated an exchange, “which must be honest and free for
the wealth and the grandeur of the realm.” He was opposed to the
dominant opinion of his day, which was that of Malestroict, and which
held that the solution to inflation was to attribute legal values to
money by royal edict. For Bodin, the price of gold and silver should
be set by the laws of the market, in other words by supply and
demand. Hoping to advance these new ideas, Bodin was worried for
people overwhelmed by inflation.  According to Bodin a ruler
“who changes the price of gold and silver ruins his people,
country and himself.”
5.2 Theories on Demons
His treatment of demonism is written as an antidote to the outbreak
of sorcery. This contagion was spreading at an alarming rate, thanks
also to the society’s growing yet harmful indifference. Bodin trained
his sights on Johann Wier (or Weyer; Piscinarius) the former servant
of the famous master of occult Cornelius Agrippa and tutor to the
children of Jeanne d’Albret (mother of Henry of Navarre, the future
Henry IV). The work is divided into four books. The first introduces
the reader to his basic ideas: the definition of a sorcerer; the
association of demons with men; the difference between good and bad
spirits; the human and divine means of understanding the mysteries of
the occult, and the illicit means for influencing human events. The
second book initiates the reader to magic in general and to silent and
spoken invocations of evil spirits. Then he comes to the most debated
questions, are those who renounce God bodily possessed by demons?
What is lycanthropy?  Can one change humans into animals?  Can
sorcerers cause illness, sterility, hail, storms, the death of men and
animals?  Book III proposes licit remedies against charms and
incantations, and considers whether it is true that sorcerers have the
power to heal. Here Bodin also addresses whether sorcerers have the
ability to influence the finding of favor with the powerful, beauty,
honors, riches, knowledge, and fertility.  He discusses illicit means
to prevent and heal evil spells, and the method for driving out evil
spirits. The fourth book concludes the work by tackling the issues of
magical practice and most importantly, the inquisition of
sorcerers. He examines the methods for proceeding against them, the
proof required, and the penalties to be inflicted. In most cases Bodin
recommends the death penalty by burning.
5.3 Naturalism
In the last years of his life Bodin dedicated himself ambitiously
to his work, with which he hoped to penetrate the secrets of the
universe. His
Theater of Universal Nature
(
Theatrum
)
is a treatment of the science of nature, or natural philosophy.
According to the title, the work addresses “in five books the
efficient and final causes of all things of the world.” It is a
well-organized encyclopedia of universal knowledge in the form of a
dialogue between Theorus, a curious theoretician who observers the
world and Mystagogus, a master and guide.  The first book examines the
principals of nature and the origin and decline of the world. The
second book addresses the natural elements of meteors, of rocks,
metals and fossils.  The third books explores types of animals; the
fourth addresses the spirit, and the fifth book concerns the number,
movement, and grandeur of the heavens respectively. This is an example
of those works of natural philosophy, which wished to be exhaustive,
and were typical of the Renaissance. The accusations of naturalism and
atheism, which his
Colloquium of the Seven About the Secrets of
the Sublime
(
Heptaplomeres
) had provoked, were only
reignited and expanded by the
Theatrum
, regardless of the
fact that he repeatedly refers to an all-powerful creator who admires
the “order” in all things.
6. Justice for Bodin: Open and Closed Questions
Biographies have attributed religious, political, and philosophical
doctrines to Bodin that he may have held. These historians have even
used the word “conversion”—a strong word in the
sixteenth century—to make their point. Rose writes of Bodin’s
“conversion to Judaism”; Moreau-Reibel and Rose of his
“conversion to the League,” which according to Rose is an
“act of apostasy” too. Bayle, Naef and Bouchez describe
his “conversion to Protestantism,” and Franklin of his
“conversion to absolutism.” Likewise Bayle and Quaglioni
describe Bodin’s tendency towards religious dissimulation or
nicodemism. Within the confines of a biography, we are limited to
address only the most important aspects of Bodin’s character as a
political actor including his adhesion to the League and his
abandonment of the “politiques.” Concerning the first
point, his adhesion to the League, we have examined the Bodin’s
position based on his own writings. The second point, Bodin’s
relationship to the “politiques,” is based on suppositions
which have become nearly a tradition in Bodin scholarship, and has
been perpetuated and reinforced by generation after generation of
historians. Unfortunately these historians have not sought sources on
which to base this claim. In fact, there are no sources that support
this argument. Indeed, Bodin never said that he was a
“politique.” Briefly addressing the heart of the matter,
historians have sought to make Bodin a convinced partisan of religious
tolerance. During Bodin’s lifetime however, religious tolerance,
defined as civil tolerance and a legal admission of confessional
diversity within a country or city, was not the ideal it would later
become after the eighteenth century. In the sixteenth
century, it was men like Sébastian Castellion who extolled the
co-existence of many religions, with which the reformed camp
disagreed. The struggle of the Huguenots from the beginning of the
civil wars, was to convert the king and realm to the true religion.
Tolerance was not an ideal since one cannot tolerate what one cannot
possibly accept. For example how could one allow Christ to coexist
with Belial, or a false religion to coexist with the one and only true
religion?  No further proof of this conviction is needed than the
fierce struggle both Calvin and Beza waged against Castellion. This
example causes one to ask the question: if Castellion supported
freedom of religion, why did the leaders of the Reformation, who
professed the same desire, denounce him so fervently?  Because, in the
reality, the French Reformers did not want freedom of religion which
could have “opened the door to all manner of sects and
heresies,” as Calvin said. At the beginning of the wars of
religion, they wanted to obtain the recognition of the reformed
religion as the sole religion in the realm. Yet, after thirty-six
years of war, and after the conversion of Henry of Navarre, they
understood that their project was too ambitious and had to be
limited. Only through true religious tolerance could they convert the
remainder of the kingdom at a later time.  The unity of faith, and
Calvinist religious concord were the ideal of Reformers
too. Concerning the “politiques,” we only have
descriptions of them from their adversaries who considered them
atheists and heathens. For instance they were accused of having no
religion because they were inclined to admit the definitive
coexistence of different forms of worship in the interest of civil
peace. Nevertheless, why have modern historians, placed men, who they
considered the “most liberal and sympathetic,” such as
Bodin, Etienne Pasquier, Duplessis-Mornay, Pierre de Beloy and many
others in the party of the “politiques.” These historians
have projected their modern ideals of tolerance, religious freedom,
pluralism, and diversity on to the period of the Wars of
Religion. Thus these scholars believed they had done a great service
to the men of the past by presenting them as forerunners of the later
values.  But, as we have seen, Bodin viewed confessional concord as
the means capable of returning religious, civil and political unity to
the kingdom. It should be recalled however that the problem was not
that of “liberty of conscience,” which the French
government had already guaranteed by edicts in 1563, but the liberty
to worship. The freedom to worship is also at the heart of the
question of tolerance. When Bodin and many of his contemporaries
thought about tolerance, it was only as provisional tolerance with the
hope of achieving civil peace and religious reunification in the
future. For Bodin, concord was essential since it formed the
foundation of sovereignty and was necessary for the full exercise of
power.
To be fair to Bodin, the offenses poured out against him by his
malicious contemporaries at the time of his adhesion to the League
should be analyzed and understood historically. The same goes for the
accusations of treason, turn-coating, trickery, opportunism,
“the charge of his reversal of his belief on religious
tolerance,” “his slipperiness and lack of principle in
joining the League,” all of which we find today in his
biographies. Bodin’s program of concord and unity was in opposition to
permanent tolerance and established diversity in juridical, political,
and theological questions, as we already seen.
6.1 Particular Questions
(1) A Judaising Catholic. Did Bodin’s passion for studying Judaic
texts arise principally from the influence of his Jewish mother? The
trail is a false one since his mother was not Jewish.  (2) Another
false trail concerns how he had miraculously escaped the
St. Bartholomew massacre in Paris by seeking refuge with Christophle
de Thou, the president of the Parlement of Paris — the story being
“late and unverifiable”according to Jacquelin Boucher
(1983). Paul Collinet, who maintained initially that Bodin was not in
Paris but in the county of Rethelois at the time (Collinet 1908,
752), later revised his ideas: he had confused J. Bodin de Saint-Amand
(our J. Bodin) with another, J. B. de Montguichet (Collinet
1910). This was in accordance with the study of Paul Cornu (Cornu
1907) about “two J. Bodins”.  Nevertheless, Cornu himself
cannot say where our Bodin was at that
 time.
[
15
]
In fact, we know nothing for certain about Bodin on the famous night
of August 24, 1572, nor is it not a matter of central historical
importance.  (3) Belief in Witchcraft. Bodin, like the majority of
people in the sixteenth century, believed in the devil and the power
of Satan. These beliefs made his biographers, especially those of the
nineteenth century, uneasy. They felt that such
superstitions tarnished Bodin’s image.  Baudrillart criticized Bodin’s
work
Demonomanie
and wrote that “Absurd fanaticism,
ridiculous and obnoxious should be written in the margins of each page
of this unfortunate book” (Baudrillart 1853, 184, 188–189).
Such vain preoccupations and a lack historical sense are two faults,
among others, that distort the historical analysis of Bodin by those
who wish to make him a man of their time rather than allowing
him to be a man of his day.
6.2 Open Questions
Some recent studies of the
Heptaplomeres
have tended to
cast some doubt on Bodin’s authorship of this work. Even if the issue
of his authorship has not been decisively resolved, one of the
secondary but beneficial consequences of these studies is that they
have increased our understanding of the on sources which the author of
this anonymous text drew — including not only
the
Daemonomania
as well as the other works by Bodin, but
also the writings of Johan Wier (1515–1588; Wier 1579).  The
most important studies questioninig Bodin’s authorship of the treatise
are those by Karl F. Faltenbacher (2002, 2009) and David Wootton
(2002), Jean Céard (2009) and Isabelle Pantin
(2009). Refutations of this thesis, on the other hand, have been
published by Jean Letrouit (1995), Andrea Suggi (2005, 2006, 2007) and
Noel Malcom (2006).
6.3 Closed questions
Sometimes historical research progresses by leaps and bounds
instead of a gradual and steady evolution. Thanks to new research
(Fontana 2009) we are now in a position to settle on certain issues in
Bodin’s life that have remained matters of conjecture until quite
recently, such as his supposed visit to Geneva in 1552 (on which, see
below).  Biographers have been faced with a series of problems
because, throughout his life, he was regularly confused with other
individuals also called Jean Bodin, not least within his own family:
he was the fourth of seven children, the second of whome was also
called Jean (Levron 1950, 14). For this reason, he has often been
assigned roles by historians which he may not have played.  He has
been conflated, for instance, with a certain Jean Bodin arrested in
two trials for heresy in Paris, one in 1547 and the other in 1548
(Weiss 1889, 17–8; Naef; Droz; but see Levron 1948).  He has
also been confused with Jean Bodin de La Bodinière or
Montguichet who, like our Jean Bodin, was an Angevin and a
commissioner for the reformation of forests in Normandy, as well as a
member of the household of the duke d’Alençon
(cf. Chauviré, 33–4; Cornu 1907, 109–111 ; Holt 1986,
41).  Among the
avocats
of the Parlement of Paris who swore
an oath to uphold Catholism in 1562, there were two Jean Bodins, one
of whom was ours (Delachenal 1885, 405–6).  Someone called Jean Bodin
was arrested at the priory of Saint-Denis-de-la-Chatre, rue
Saint-Barthélemy in Paris on March 6, 1569, accused of being of
the new opinion’.  He was released on August 23, 1570 following the
edict of pacification of Saint-Germain (Weiss 1923, 87-9; Droz 1948,
79; Boucher 1983).  But this cannot be our Jean Bodin (De Caprariis
1959, 325).  None of the various Jean Bodins of whom we have knowledge
around 1569 — the student at Angers, the priest at Bourgueil in
the parish of Saint-Aubin du Pavoil near Segré, or the merchant
at St-Maurice — correspond to the Jean Bodin in whom we are
interested (Levron 1948, 73–4).  Nor ashould we identify Jean Bodin
the philosopher with his various namesakes (Couzinet 1996, 240) who
were implicated in the trial of La Môle and Coconnas in 1574
(Holt 1986, 41) or accompanied Brisson on a mission in 1581
(Moreau-Reibel 1933, 258), or got mixed up in the Champvallon affair
of the following year (Radouant 1970, 45) or were suspected of having
participated in the Babington Plot against Elizabeth I of England
(Rose 1980, 215–6).
Equally, there is no tangible or demonstrable proof to support the
supposed Protestant leanings of Bodin.  Roger Chauviré (1914,
24) speculated, on the basis of his hypothetical stay in Geneva in
1552, that he had perhaps converted to the new faith.  This particular
supposition is linked to another, more general one, that Bodin had a
truly reformed religiosity, coexisting with his other judaising
tendencies and inclinations towards natural religion. This is why
there is a persistent tendency among certain historians to perceive
him as a dissimulating Protestant and ‘Nicodemite’.
Following Naef and Droz, they believe that Bodin can be identified
with ‘Jehan Bodin de Sainct-Amand diocese de Bourges’
(following Bordier, who, however, provides no references to Jean
Bodin, author of the
Republic
) who spent time in Geneva in
1552, asking to be received as inhabitant there, who married
Typhène Renault and had an argument with Jérôme
Bolsec (Naef and Droz, 83) and who even became a minister of the Holy
Word (Weiss, contradicted by Naef, 153; but see Droz, 83).  All these
hypotheses, however, have been undermined now that Letizia Fontana
(2009) has demonstrated that the Jean Bodin who was present in Geneva
in 1552 cannot possibly have been the philosopher. That said, it still
remains possible that Bodin occasionally felt sympathy, on the
religious grounds, towards Protestantism and Protestants in general,
though this stopped short of adherence to the confession of the
Reformed faith.  Such an attitude could often be found among moderate
Catholics, men of letters, jurists, writers and even theologians and
was not in conflict with Bodin’s severely negative assessment —
on a purely political level — of the Huguenots as a result of
their raising arms against their sovereign.
7. Publications, Conferences and Projects, 2013–2018
In 2013 two important Bodin editions appeared. Sara 
Miglietti published her doctoral dissertation (Scuola Normale
Superiore, Pisa): Jean Bodin,
Methodus ad facilem historiarum
congnitione
, edizione, introduzione e commento di S. Miglietti,
Pisa: Edizioni della Normale, with an accompanying Italian translation.
In addition, Mario Turchetti published a critical edition of the first
book of the French text of
La République
with a
parallel Latin edition of
De
Republica
, translated by Bodin and published in 1586 (see
Cotroneo 2014 ‘Il ritorno di Bodin’); N. de Araujo is
responsible for the text, and the preface is by Q. Skinner. This
volume, the first of a projected six volume edition, is now available
online from
Classiques Garnier
.
Its publication was the occasion for an international conference at
the University of Fribourg (4–5 October 2013); and another is
planned for 5 March 2015, organized by the Universities of Paris-IV
Sorbonne (Denis Crouzet) and Paris-VI Descartes (Yves Charles
Zarka).
An international conference was held in Oxford in June 2014 (St
Anne’s College): ‘Community, Government and Territoriality in the
Political Thought of Jean Bodin’, organised by Sophie Nicholls
and Anne Becker.
The Reception of Bodin
, edited by Howell A.  Lloyd, was
published in Leiden by Brill in 2013. The volume presents the
sixteenth-century jurist as a “prismatic agent” through
whose works a vast inherited juridical, philosophical, religious,
political and anthropological fabric of learning of the West was
disseminated in a revitalised form into world ripe for modernity.
At Tufts University (Boston, USA), a ‘Bodin Project’ has
now been launched by Ioannis Evrigenis, the aim of which is to make
available online the French, Latin and English (
Six Bookes of a
Commonweale
in Richard Knolly’s 1606 translation) texts of Bodin’s
Republic
. The digitized editions produced by the ‘Bodin
Project’ will, in due course, become part of the vast range of
works consultable online from the 
 (
Perseus Digital Library
).
Another
Bodin Project
was originally based at the
University of Hull and is now based at Harvard.
The ‘Bodin Sources Project’, directed by Professor Kenneth
D. McRae, aims to list the sources mentioned in five of Bodin’s major
works –
Methodus
,
République
,
Démonomanie
,
Theatrum
and the commentary on
Oppian – in machine-readable form. For further information,
contact: K. D. McRae, Department of Political Science, Carleton
University, 1125 Colonel by Drive, Ottawa ON K1S 5B6 Canada.
The hectic pace of Bodin studies has not let up in recent years; for
brevity’s sake, however, only the most important contributions
will be singled out here. Anna Di Bello (2014) traces in detail the
way in which the Latin translation of
La République
was made, providing a new understanding of Bodin’s elaboration
of his masterpiece. The parallels between the French and Latin
versions, the collation of the two texts, and the comparisons between
them provide the opportunity to evaluate Bodin’s preoccupations
at two distinct moments in time.  Those preoccupations include his
conceptions of the State and the optimal structure for the realization
of a polity which, beyond the good ordering and right administration
of society, ensures the exercise of a sovereignty that preserves
‘harmonic justice’ in a royal monarchy such as
France. Daniel Lee (2016) explores the Roman Law sources that underlie
the emergence, and rise to prominence, of the theory of popular
sovereignty in the early modern period. In two chapters, he seeks to
undermine the traditional idea that Bodin is an
‘absolutist’ and tries to present him in a more authentic
light.  Howell A. Lloyd (2017) reconstructs the intellectual biography
of Bodin in a novel way. Finally, Turchetti (2018) examines the
distinction between despotism and tyranny, which was essential to
Bodin as the juridico-political foundation of the right of resistance,
but which was progressively forgotten in later centuries.
Despite this welcome resurgence of interest in Bodin, a remaining
deisderatum is a new English translation of Bodin’s
Republic
, one which meets the needs of twenty-first-century
researchers.
Bibliography
Works by Bodin Cited in the Text
[
Oppiani
]
Oppiani De venatione
, Libri IIII, J. Bodino
Andegavensi interprete, Paris, apud Michaëlem Vascosanum,
1555.
[
Oratio
]
Oratio de instituenda in republica juventute ad
senatum populumque Tolosatem
, Toulosae, ex officina Petri Putei,
1559. Latin text and French trans. in [Me] 30; English trans. in [Mo].
[
Methodus
]
Methodus ad facilem historiarum cognitionem
,
Parisiis, apud Martinum Juvenem, 1566. Text and French trans. in [Me]
104–269; English translation in [Re]. Italian translation by Sara
Miglietti, Pisa, Edizioni della Normale, 2013.
[
Response
]
Les Paradoxes de Monsieur de Malestroit,
conseiller du Roy et maistre ordinaire de ses comptes, sur le faict
des monnoyes, presentez à sa Majesté, au moi de mars
1566, avec la response de M. Jean Bodin ausdicts Paradoxes
,
Paris, Martin Le Jeune, 1568. English translation in [T].
[
Lettre Bautru
]
Lettre à Jean Bautru de Matras
,
1568.  Latin text in [Ro] 79–81.
[
La Harangue
]
La Harangue de Messire Charles de Cars evesque et
duc de Langres prononcée aux magnifiques ambassadeurs de
Poulogne estans à Metz le 8
e
jour d’aoust 1573
tournée de François en Latin par J. Bodin Av. cat.
,
Paris, 1573.
[
Conseil
]
Consilia Johannis Bodini Galli et Fausti
Longiani Itali, De Principe recte institutendo. Cum praeceptis
cuiusdam principis politicis, quae bene instituto in imperio
observanda. Ex Gallica, Italica et Castellana lingua latine reddita a
Johanne Bornitio Erphordiae, Excusa per Iohannem Pistorium, Anno
1603. Consilium Johannis Bodini de institutione principis aut alius
nobilioris ingenii
(Erfurt, 1603), in [Ro] 11–16 (Latin text without
translation).
[
République
]
Les Six Livres de la République
,
Paris, Du Puys, 1576. French editions in 1576, 1577, 1578, 1579, 1580,
1582, 1583, 1587, 1591, 1593, 1594, 1599, 1608, 1610, 1629, 1961,
1986, 2013. Latin editions in 1586, 1591, 1594, 1601, 1609, 1619, 1622,
1641, 2013. Italian editions in 1588 and 1964–1997. Spanish edition in
1590. German editions in 1592, 1611 and 1986. English edition in 1606.
Bilingual edition, French with Latin, in 2013.
(See the subsection below on Editions of the Commonwealth.) The
seminal English translation in [Kn] is reproduced in [Mc].
[
Recueil
]
Recueil de tout ce qui s’est
négocié en la compagnie du Tiers État de France,
en l’Assemblée généale des trois estats,
assignés par le Roy en la ville de Bloys au 15 nov. 1576
,
place of publication unknown, 1577
[
Exposition
]
Juris universi distributio
, Paris, J. Du
Puys, 1578. Text and French trans. in [J]; English trans. of extracts
in A.L. Fell,
Bodin’s Humanistic Legal System and Rejection of
Medieval Political Theology
, Boston: Mass., Oelgeschlager, Gunn
and Hain, 1987.
[1579]
Artis historicae penus octodecim scriptorium tam
veterum quam recentiorum monumentis et inter eos Jo. praecipue Bodini
libris Methodi historiae sex instructa
, Basileae, P. Pernae
officina, 1579.
[
Apologie
]
Apologie de René Herpin pour la
République de Jean Bodin
, Paris, Jacques du Puys,
1581. (Herpin is an angevingian name which Bodin used for this
work.)
[
Démonomanie
]
De la démonomanie des sorciers
, Paris,
Jacques Du Puys, 1581;
De magorum daemonomania, Libri VI
,
Hildesheim. Olms, 2003. English translation in [S].
[
Épître
]
Epistre de J. Bodin touchant l’institution de
ses enfants à son neveu
, Bibliothèque Nationale MS
Latin 6564, fols. 483–485, 1585. Published in [Ro] 3–4.
[
Lettre Bodin
]
Lettre de Monsieur Bodin où il traite des
occasions qui l’ont fait rendre ligueur
, January 20, 1590. Text
in [Ro] 87–93. Some letters of Bodin are published in various
collections; see the appendix of Chauviré 1914 and
Moreau-Reibel 1935.
[
Heptaplomeres
]
Colloquium Heptaplomeres de rerum sublimium
arcanis abditis
, ed. L. Noack, Schwerin, 1857 (first ed. Kiel,
1683). English translation in [Ku].
[
Theatrum
]
Universae naturae theatrum, in quo rerum omnium
effectrices causae et fines quinque libris discutiuntur
, Lugduni,
apud Jacobum Roussin, 1596. English trans. of extracts in A. L. Fell,
Bodin’s Humanistic Legal System and Rejection of Medieval Political
Theology
, Boston, (Mass.), Oelgeschlager, Gunn and Hain, 1987.
[
Paradoxon
]
Io. Bodini Paradoxon, quod nec virtus ulla in mediocritate,
nec summum hominis bonum in virtutis actione consistere possit, Ad
Bernardum Potierum Ludovici F
., Parisiis, Excudebat Dionysius
Duvallius, 1596; Latin Text and Italian Translation in bilingual
Edition by Andrea Suggi,
Paradosso
sulla virtù
, Milano: Nino Aragno,
2009.
Translations and Critical Editions Cited
[J]
Jerphagnon, Lucien, text and French trans.,
Juris
universi distributio
, commentary by Simone Goyard-Fabre, notes by
René-Marie Rampelberg, Paris, P.U. France, 1985.
[Kn]
Knolles, R., trans.,
The Six Bookes
of a Commonweale, Written by I. Bodin a famous Lawyer, and a man of
great Experience in matter of State
, based on French and Latin
editions, London: Impensis G. Bishop, 1606.
[Ku]
Kuntz, M., trans.,
Colloquium of the Seven about
Secrets of the Sublime
, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1975.
[Me]
Mesnard, Pierre, ed.,
Œuvres
philosophiques de Jean Bodin
, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
 1951. (Collection “Corpus géneral des philosophes
français. Auteurs modernes”, t. 5, 3); contains Latin texts and
Mesnard’s French trans. of “Le discours au Sénat et au peuple de
Toulouse”;“Tableau du droit universel”; “La
méthode de l’histoire”.
[Mc]
McRae, K.D., ed.,
The six books of a
commonweale: a facsimile reprint of the English translation of 1606,
corrected and supplemented in the light of a new comparison with the
French and Latin texts
, Cambridge: Harvard University Press,
1962.
[Mo]
More, G.A., trans.,
Address to the
Senate and People of Toulouse on the Education of Youth in the
Commonwealth
, Chevy Chase, 1965.
[Re]
Reynolds, B., trans.,
Method for the easy comprehension of
History
, New York: Columbia University Press, 1945.
[Ro]
Rose, Paul Laurence, ed.,
Selected
Writings on Philosophy, Religion and Politics
, Genève:
Droz, 1980. Contains “Épitre à son neveau” 1586;
“Consilium de institutione principis” 1603;
“Sapientiae moralis epitome” 1586; “Paradoxon”
1596; “Le Paradoxe de J. Bodin” 1598; “Lettre
à Jean Bautru de Matras” 1568–69?; “Lettre de
M. Bodin” 1590.
[S]
Scott, R.A., trans.,
On the Demon-Mania
of Witches
, Toronto: Victoria University Press, 1995.
[T]
Tudor, H., trans.,
Response to the Paradoxes of
Malestroit
, Thoemmes Press, 1997.
[To]
Tooley, M.J., trans.,
Six Books of the
Commonwealth
, Oxford: Blackwell, 1955. 
 [
Available online]
.
Bibliographies
Bibliographie critique des &eeacute;ditions anciennes de J. Bodin
, 
R. Crahay, M.-T. Isaac, and M.-T. Lenger, Gembloux: Académie royale
de Belgique, 1992.
Couzinet, Marie-Dominique,
Bibliographie des écrivains
français: Jean Bodin
, Roma, Paris, Memini, 2001.
Supplemental bibliography of secondary sources on Jean Bodin
, The Bodin Project.
“A Consolidated Bibliography”, in H. A. Lloyd (ed.),
in
The Reception of Bodin
, Leiden: Brill, 2013,
417–452.
Editions of the
Commonwealth
The first volume of a planned six-volume critical edition of
Six
Livres de la République,
with the French text and facing
Latin translation by Bodin (Paris: Classiques Garnier, 2013) and is
available online (see section 7 above). For the complete French text,
based on the 1593 edition, see
Les six livres de la
République
, edited by Christiane Frémont,
Marie-Dominique Couzinet, Henri Rochais, 6 vols, Paris: Fayard, 1976. A
facsimile edition of the 1583 text was published in 1971 by Scientia
Verlag.
For translations, see: (English)
The Six Books of a
Commonwealth
, edited by  K. 
D. MacRae,  Cambridge MA: Harvard University
Press, 1962, as well as the extracts in A. L. Fell,
Bodin’s
Humanistic Legal System and Rejection of Medieval Political
Theology
, Boston: Oelgeschlager, Gunn and Hain, 1987, and
On
Sovereignty
.
Four Chapters from The Six Books of the
Commonwealth
, trans. by J. H. Franklin, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1992, and the abridged translation,
Six Books of
the Commonwealth
, edited by M. J. Tooley (cited above as [To]),
which is available online; (Spanish)
Los seis libros de la
República 1
, ed. José Luis Bermejo Cabrero, 2 vols,
Madrid: Centro de Estudios Constitucionales, 1992; (German),
Sechs
Bücher über den Staat
, edited by P.C. Mayer-Tasch,
transl. B. Wimmer, München: Beck, 1981; and (Italian)
I
sei libri dello Stato
, a cura di Margherita Isnardi Parente e
Diego Quaglioni, 3 vols, Torino: Unione tipografico-editrice,
1964–1997.
Secondary Literature
Andrew, Edward, 2011, “Jean Bodin on Sovereignty”,
Republics of Letters: A Journal for the Study of Knowledge,
Politics, and the Arts
, 2: 75–84.
Aviles, Fernandez, Miguel, 1985, “La Censura Inquisitorial de
Los seis libros de la Republica
de Jean Bodin”,
Hispania sacra
, 37: 655–692.
Baldini, Enzo A., ed., 1997,
J. Bodin a 400 anni dalla morte:
bilancio storiografico e prospettive di ricerca,
in
Il
pensiero politico
, 30.
–––, 2000, “Jean Bodin e l’Indice dei
Libri proibiti”, in
Censura ecclesiastica e cultura politica
in Italia tra Cinquecento e Seicento
, a cura di Cristina Stango,
Firenze: Olschki, 79–100.
–––, 2001, “Primi attacchi romani alla
République
di Bodin sul finire del 1588. I testi di
Minuccio Minucci e di Filippo Sega”,
Il pensiero
politico
, 34: 3–41.
Barret-Kriegel, Blandine, 1985, “Jean Bodin, de l’empire
à la souveraineté; de l’état de justice
à l’état administratif”,
Actes du
colloque interdisciplinaire d’Angers (24–27 mai 1984)
, 1:
345–356.
Bart, Jean, 2005, “La justification du tyrannicide selon les
monarchomaques”, in
Le droit de résistance à
l’oppression: le droit contre le droit. Actes du colloque de
Dijon, 12–13 décembre 2002
, edited by by Dominique
Gros and Olivier Camy,
Le Genre humain
, 44: 47–57.
Basdevant, Jules, 1944, “Contribution de Jean Bodin à
la formation du droit international”,
Revue historique de
droit français et étranger
, 4e
série, 22: 143–178.
Bayle, Pierre, 1730, “Jean Bodin,”
Dictionnaire
historique et critique
, Amsterdam: P. Brunel, l, p.
588–594.
Baudrillart, Henri, 1853,
J. Bodin et son temps: tableau des
théories politiques et des idées économiques au
XVIe siècle
, Paris: Guillaumin.
Beaud, Olivier, 2002, “Lo Stato di sudditi e la
modernità dell’opera di Bodin”, in his
La
potenza dello Stato
, Napoli: Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane.
Beaulac, Stéphane, 2003, “The Social Power of
Bodin’s ‘Sovereignty’ And International Law
Bodin’s ‘Sovereignty’”,
Melbourne Journal
of International Law
, 4: 28.
–––, 2004,
The Power of Language in the
Making of International Law: the Word ‘Sovereignty’ in
Bodin and Vattel and the Myth of Westphalia
, Leiden: M.
Nijhoff.
Becker, Anna, 2014, “Jean Bodin on Oeconomics and
Politics”,
History of European Ideas
, 40:
135–154.
Bellussi, Germano, 1985, “L’absolutisme politique et la
tolérance religieuse dans l’œuvre de Jean Bodin et
de Thomas Hobbes”, in
Actes du colloque interdisciplinaire
d’Angers (24–27 mai 1984)
, 1: 43–47.
Benedettini, Riccardo, 2009,
“
I
Six livres de la
République
di Jean Bodin tradotti da Lorenzo Conti: tra
segni di censura e filologia”,
Il
pensiero
politico
, 42: 198–229.
Bermejo Cabrera, José Luis, 1992
.
“Textos
normativos hispánicos en la obra de Jean Bodin”,
Anuario de historia del derecho español
, 62:
587–592.
Berns, Thomas, 1999, “Souveraineté, droit et
gouvernementalité: à partir des
Six livres de la
République
de Jean Bodin”,
Bolletino: Archivio
della ragion di Stato
, 7–8: 125–143.
–––, 2000, “Bodin: la souveraineté
saisie par ses marques
”
,
Bibliothèque
d’humanisme et Renaissance
, 62: 611–623.
Berriot, François, 1994, “Jean Bodin et
l’Islam”, in his
Spiritualités,
hétérodoxies et imaginaires
, Saint-Etienne:
Publications de l’Université de Saint-Étienne,
207–220.
Biral, Alessandro, 1980, “Jean Bodin e la moderna scienza
politica”, in A. Biral, A. Cavarero, C. Pacchiani (eds.),
Teorie politiche e Stato nell’epoca
dell’assolutismo
, Roma: Istituto della Enciclopedia
italiana.
Blair, Ann, 1997,
The Theater of Nature: Jean Bodin and
Renaissance Science
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
–––, 2004, “La philosophie naturelle dans
l’œuvre de Jean Bodin”, in
L’œuvre de
Jean Bodin: actes du colloque tenu à Lyon à
l’occasion du quatrième centenaire de sa mort, 11–13
janvier 1996
, éd. G.-A. Pérouse, N.
Dockès-Lallement, J.-M. Servet, Paris: H. Champion,
359–369.
–––, 2013, “Authorial Strategies in Jean
Bodin”, in Lloyd, ed., 2013, 137–156.
Blanc, Jérôme, 2006, “Les monnaies de la
République
: un retour sur les idées
monétaires de Jean Bodin”,
Cahiers
d’économie politique: histoire de la pensée et
théorie
, 50: 165–190.
Boccalini, Trajano, 1618,
De’ Ragguagli di Parnaso
,
Venetia: appresso Giovanni Gherigli.
Bodin, Jean,
On the Demon-mania of Witches
, translated by
Randy Scott, edited by Jonathan Pearl, Toronto: Centre for Reformation
and Renaissance Studies, 2001.
Bonnay, Richard, 2003, “Reconsidering Absolutism in Early
Modern Europe: the Development of an Idea”,
Bulletin of
Asia-Pacific Studies
, 13: 32.
Bordier, Henri, 1879, Jehan Bodin,
La France protestante ou
Vies des protestants français
, 2nd edition, 6 vol. (A-G),
Paris: Sandoz-Fischbacher, vol. 2, 671.
Botero, Giovanni,
De la raison d’état
(1589–1598)
, édition et trad. de l’italien par Pierre
Benedittini et Romain Descendre, Paris: Gallimard, 2014.
Boucher, Jacqueline, 1983, “L’incarcération de Jean
Bodin pendant la troisième guerre de religion”,
Nouvelle revue du Seizième siècle
, 1:
33–44.
–––, 2007a,
Société et
mentalités autour de Henri III
, Paris: H. Champion.
–––, 2007b, “Sous Henri III:
l’impossible coexistence religieuse souhaitée par Michel
de l’Hospital”, in
Le Chancelier Michel de
l’Hospital: actes du colloque de Riom [Puy-de Dôme], 8-9
septembre 2006
, in
Revue d’Auvergne
, 121:
127–137.
Boyer-Xambeu, M. T., Deleplace, G., Gillard, L., Jannin P., 1986,
Monnaie privée et pouvoir des princes: économie des
relations monétaires à la Renaissance
, Paris:
Presses du Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique.
Braun, Harald E., 2013, “Making the Canon? The Early
Reception of the République in Castilian Political
Thought”, in Lloyd, ed., 2013 257–292.
Brown, John L., 1939,
The Methodus ad facilem Historiarum
Cognitionem of J. Bodin. A Critical Study
, Washington DC.
Bruschi, Christian, 2004, “ Mesnage’ et
république [chez Jean Bodin]”, in
L’œuvre
de Jean Bodin
, éd. G.-A. Pérouse
et al
.,
Paris: H. Champion, 19–38.
Buddruss Eckhard, 1987, “Érudition classique et
théorie quantitative de la monnaie dans la Réponse
à Malestroit de Jean Bodin”,
Journal des savants
,
1: 89–125.
Burgess, Glenn, 2012, “Tyrants, Absolute Kings, Arbitrary
Rulers and the Commonwealth of England: Some Reflections on Seventeenth
Century Political Vocabulary”, in
Monarchism and Absolutism
in Early Modern Europe
, edited by Cesare Cuttica and Glenn
Burgess, London: Pickering & Chatto, 147–158.
–––, 2013, “Bodin in the English
Revolution”, in Lloyd, ed., 2013, 387–408.
Burke, Peter, 2013, “The History and Theory of
Reception”, in Lloyd, ed., 2013, 21–38.
Cappa Legora, Antonio, 1913,
I Monarcomachi, saggio sulla
teorica della resistenza nel secolo XVI
, Torino: Fratelli
Bocca.
Cardascia, Guillaume, 1937, “Sur une édition genevoise
de la
République
de Jean Bodin”,
Humanisme
et Renaissance
, 4: 212–214.
–––, 1943, “Machiavel et Jean Bodin”,
Bibliothèque d’Humanisme et Renaissance
, 3:
129–167.
Carta, Paolo, 1997, “Il diritto di confisca nella
République
di Jean Bodin”,
I
l
pensiero politico
, 30: 311–324.
–––, 2000, “La lettera di Jean Bodin
à Barnabé Brisson in una traduzione coeva”,
Il
pensiero politico
, 33: 63–95.
Céard, Jean, 2009, “L’auteur du
Colloquium
Heptaplomeres
, lecteur de Bodin”, in Faltenbacher, ed.,
2009, 117–134.
Cebà, Ansaldo, 2001,
Il cittadino di repubblica
[1617], a cura di V. I. Comparato, Firenze: Centro Editoriale
Toscano.
Cervelli, Innocenzo, 1997, “Bodin, Daniele e Marco
Polo”,
Il
pensiero politico
, 30:
233–249.
Cesbron, G., Jean Foyer, and Geneviève Rivoire (eds.),
Actes du Colloque interdisciplinaire d’Angers, 24 au 27 mai
1984
, [organized by] Université d’Angers, Centre de
recherches de littérature et de linguistique de l’Anjou et des
bocages de l’ouest, 2 vols, Angers: Presses de l’Université,
1985.
Chanteur, Janine, 1967, “Jean Bodin et les critères de
la légitimité dans la République”, in his
L’idée de légitimité
, Paris:
PuF.
–––, 1991, “La loi naturelle et la
souveraineté chez Jean Bodin”, in
Théologie
et droit dans la science politique de l’État
moderne.
Actes de la table ronde de Rome (12–14 novembre 1987),
Rome: École Française de Rome, 283–294.
Chantrel, Laure, 2004, “Une relecture des travaux de Jean
Bodin sur la fiscalité à partir des comptes rendus des
États généraux de 1560 à 1588”, in
L’œuvre de Jean Bodin
, éd. G.-A.
 Pérouse
et al
., Paris: H. Champion, 333–352.
Chauviré, Roger, 1914,
J. Bodin, auteur de la
“République”
, La Flèche: Besnier.
–––, 1929, “La pensée religieuse de
Jean Bodin (d’après des documents nouveaux)”,
La province d’Anjou
, 4: 433–452.
Chrom Jacobsen, Mogens, 2000,
Jean Bodin et le dilemme de la
philosophie politique moderne
, Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum
Press.
Church, William Farr, 1941, “Jean Bodin and His
Contemporaries”, in his
Constitutional Thought in Sixteenth
Century France. A Study in The Evolution of Ideas
, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Cid Vázquez, Maria Teresa, 2004, “Estado, formas de
gobierno y soberanía en el pensamiento político
español del siglo XVII”,
Cuadernos de
pensamiento
, 16: 109–158.
Collinet, Paul, 1908, “J. Bodin et la
Saint-Barthélemy. Documents inédits sur sa vie, de
juillet 1572 à mars 1573”,
Nouvelle revue de droit
français et étranger
, 32: 752–756.
–––, 1910, “Rectifications à
l’article: J. Bodin et la Saint-Barthélemy”,
Nouvelle
revue de droit français et étranger
, 34:
128–129.
Comparato, Vittor Ivo, 1981,
Jean Bodin. Antologia di scritti
politici
, Bologna: Il Mulino.
–––, 1982, “Note su Bodin e Aristotele,
sovranità e proprietà nella definizione di Stato”,
Materiali di storia. Annali della Facoltà di Scienze
politiche di Perugia
, 18, 6: 7–13.
–––, 1987, “Il modello di legislatore nella
République
di Jean Bodin”, in
L’educazione giuridica, V. Modelli di legislazione e
legislatori
, 1, Napoli: Ed. scientifiche italiane,
91–101.
–––, 2013, “The Italian
‘Readers’ of Bodin, 17th–18th Centuries: Readers of
Bodin in Italy – From Albergati to Filangieri”, in Lloyd,
ed., 2013, 343–370.
Comparato, Vittor Ivo (ed.), 1981,
“La
République” di J. Bodin
, Atti del Convegno di
Perugia, 14–15 nov. 1980, in
Il
pensiero
politico
, 14.
Conti Odorisio, Ginevra, 2007,
La famille et
l’État dans
La République
de Jean
Bodin
, Paris: l’Harmattan.
Cornu, Pierre, 1907, “Jean Bodin de Monguichet”,
Revue de l’Anjou
, 56 (Janvier-Février): 109-111.
Costa, Pietro, 1999, “La celebrazione della sovranità:
Jean Bodin”, in his
Civitas
. Storia della
cittadinanza in Europa. Vol. 1: Dalla civiltà comunale al
Settecento
, Roma-Bari: Laterza, 65-80.
Cotroneo, Girolamo, 1962, “La ‘storia integrale’
nella
Methodus
di Jean Bodin”, in
Historica
,
15: 95–107.
–––, 1964a, “Il senso della storia nella
Methodus
di Jean Bodin”, in
Rivista di studi
crociani
, 1: 296–311.
–––, 1964b, “Introduzione allo studio della
Methodus
di Jean Bodin (1530?–1596)”, in
Atti
dell’Accademia Pontaniana
, 13: 221–223.
–––, 1966a, “Il problema della storia nel
De institutione
di François Baudouin”, in
Rivista di studi crociani
, 3: 403–416.
–––, 1966b,
J
ean Bodin teorico della
storia
, Napoli: Edizioni scientifiche.
–––, 1970,
I trattatisti dell’Ars
historica
, Napoli: Giannini.
–––, 1981, “Ancora sui rapporti fra la
Methodus
e la
République
”,
Il
pensiero politico
, 14: 18–25.
–––, 2014, “Il ritorno di Bodin”,
Filosofia politica
, 1: 137–142.
Couzinet, Marie-Dominique, 1991,
La logique divine dans
les
, Six livres de la République
de Jean Bodin:
hypothèse de lecture
, Florence: European University
Institute.
Couzinet, Marie-Dominique, 1995a, “Jean Bodin: état des
lieux et perspectives de recherche”,
Bulletin de
l’Association d’étude sur l’humanisme, la réforme
et la renaissance
, 40: 11–22.
–––, 1995b, “Fonction de la
géographie dans la connaissance historique: le modèle
cosmographique de l’histoire universelle chez F. Bauduin et
J. Bodin”,
Corpus
, 28: 113–145.
–––, 1996a,
Histoire et méthode
à la Renaissance. Une lecture de la Methodus de J. Bodin
,
Paris: Vrin.
–––, 1996b, “La
Methodus ad facilem
historiarum cognitionem
de Jean Bodin: histoire cosmographie et
méthode”, in
J. Bodin, nature, histoire, droit et
politique
, éd. Y. Ch. Zarka, Paris: Presses Universitaires
de France, 23–42.
–––, 2001,
Bibliographie des
écrivains français.  Jean Bodin
, Roma-Paris:
Memini.
–––, 2007, “La philosophie morale de Jean
Bodin dans le Paradoxe de 1596”, in his
Sub specie
hominis
:
études sur le savoir humain au
xvi
e
siècle
, Paris: Vrin.
–––, 2013, “On Bodin’s Method”,
in Lloyd, ed., 2013, 39–66.
Crahay, Roland, 1981, “Jean Bodin devant la censure: la
condamnation de la République”,
Il pensiero
politico
, 14: 154–172.
–––, 1984a, “Jean Bodin aux États
généraux de 1576”, in
Assemblee di stati e
istituzioni rappresentative nella storia del pensiero politico
moderno
, Città di Castello: Maggioli Editore, 1:
85–120.
–––, 1984b (with M.-Th. Isaac et M.-Th. Lenger),
“Les éditions de l’
Apologie de René
Herpin
. Contribution à la bibliographie historique des
œuvres de Jean Bodin”, in
Palaestra Typographica.
Aspects de la production du livre humaniste et religieux au XVIe
siècle
, Aubel: Gason, 97–129.
–––, 1985, “Controverses et censures religieuses
à propos de la
République
de Jean Bodin”,
in
D’Érasme à Campanella. Textes de Roland
Crahay
, J. Marx éd., Bruxelles: Éditions de
l’Université de Bruxelles, 132–152.
–––, with M.-Th. Isaac and M.-Th. Lenger (eds.),
1992,
Bibliographie critique des éditions anciennes de Jean
Bodin
, Préface de V. I. Comparato, Gembloux:
Académie Royale de Belgique.
Cremer, Albert, 1975, “Les théoriciens italiens de la
Raison d’État juges de Jean Bodin”,
Revue
d’Histoire diplomatique
, 89: 249–261.
–––, 1977, “La ‘protection’
dans le droit international public européen du XVIe
siècle”,
Théories et pratiques politiques
à la Renaissance. XVIIe Colloque
international de Tours
, Paris: Vrin, 145–157.
–––, 1982, “La genèse du droit des
gens moderne et la conscience européenne: Francisco de Vitoria
et Jean Bodin”, in
La conscience européenne aux xv e
et xvi e siècles
. Actes du Colloque international
organisé à l’ENSJF, 30 septembre – 3 octobre 1980,
Paris: École Normale Supérieure des Jeunes Filles,
88–102.
Crouzet, Denis, 2018, “La rupture de l’unité de
foi dans la France du XVIe siècle”, in
L’Histoire en
questions. Mélanges en l’honneur de Mario Turchetti
, Silvia Arletta
(ed.), Paris: Classiques Garnier, 101–126.
Daston, Lorraine, and Michael Stolleis, 2008,
Natural Law and
the Laws of Nature in Early Modern Europe: Jurisprudence, Theology,
Moral and Natural Philosophy
, Aldershot: Ashgate.
Daubresse, Sylvie, 2005,
Le Parlement de Paris, ou la voix de
la raison (1559–1589)
, Genève: Droz.
–––, 2006, “Le Parlement et
l’enregistrement des actes royaux au XVIe
siècle”, in
Dire le droit: normes, juges,
jurisconsultes. Actes du colloque international des 4–5 novembre
2004
, tenu à l’Université Paris II, edited by
Barbara Anagnostou-Cana, Paris: Ed. Panthéon-Assas,
253-266.
Daussy, Hugues, 2007, “La question d’obéissance
aux autorités dans l’œuvre d’Innocent
Gentillet, magistrat réformé”, in
Hommes de loi
et politique, XVIe-XVIIIe siècle
, éd. Hugues Daussy
et Frédérique Pitou, Rennes: Presses de
l’Université de Rennes, 21–34.
–––, 2014,
Le parti huguenot. Chronique
d’une désillusion (1557–1572)
, Genève:
Droz.
De Caprariis, Vittorio, 1959,
Propaganda e pensiero politico in
Francia durante les guerre di religione)
, I: 1559–1572,
Napoli: Edizioni Scientifiche Italiane.
Delachenal, Roland, 1885,
Histoire des avocats du Parlement de
Paris (1300–1600)
, Paris: Plon.
Del Prete, Antonella, 2008, “
Menu peuple, multitude,
populace
: considerazioni sul vocabolario politico-sociale di
Jean Bodin”,
Laboratorio dell’ISPF
, 5, 1:
4–27.
Demelmestre, Gaëlle, 2011,
Les deux souverainetés
et leur destin. Le tournant Bodin-Althusius
, Paris:
Cerf.
Denzer, Horst, ed., 1973,
J. Bodin. Verhandlungen der
internationalen Tagung in München
, München: Beck.
Desan, Philippe, 1987a,
Naissance de la méthode
(Machiavel, La Ramée, Bodin, Montaigne, Descartes)
, Paris:
Nizet.
–––, 1987b, “La justice mathématique
de Jean Bodin”,
Corpus, revue de philosophie
, 4:
19–29.
–––, 1995, “L’histoire mathématique
de Jean Bodin”, in Desan,
Penser l’histoire à la
Renaissance
, Caen: Paradigme, 145–169.
Descendre, Romain, 2009,
L’état du monde: Giovanni
Botero entre raison d’état et géopolitique
,
Genève: Droz.
Desideri, Paolo, 1998, “Plutarco nel pensiero politico di
Jean Bodin”, in
L’eredità culturale di
Plutarco dall’antichità al Rinascimento
. Atti del
VII colloquio su Plutarco, Milano-Gragnano 28-30 maggio 1997, Napoli:
D’Auria, 299–311.
–––, 2008, “Les
Moralia
dans la
Méthode
et les S
ix livres sur la
République
de Jean Bodin”, in
Moralia et
œuvres meslées à la Renaissance: actes du colloque
international de Toulouse, 19–21 mai 2005
, éd.
Olivier Guerrier, Paris: Champion, 199–215.
Di Bello, Anna, 2014,
Stato e sovranità nel
De
Republica libri sex
di Jean Bodin
, Napoli: Liguori.
Diecmann, Johann, 1683,
De naturalismo tum aliorum, tum maxime
J. Bodini
, Kiel: Reumann.
Dockès, Nicole, 1986, “La loi,
l’équité, la justice et la paix ou la justice
selon Jean Bodin”, in
Le juste et l’injuste à
la Renaissance et à l’âge classique
. Actes du
colloque international tenu à Saint-Étienne, 21-23 avril
1983, Saint-Étienne: Publication de
l’Université de Saint-Étienne, 65-89.
Dockès-Lallement, Nicole, 2004, “Les
républiques sous l’influence des nombres: le hasard et la
nécessité chez Jean Bodin”, in
L’œuvre de Jean Bodin
, éd. G.-A.
 Pérouse
et al
., Paris: H. Champion,
127–149.
Droz, Eugénie, 1948, “Le carme Jean Bodin,
hérétique,”
Bibliothèque d’humanisme et
Renaissance
, 10: 77–94.
Dunning, Wm. A., 1896, “Jean Bodin on Sovereignty, with some
References to the Doctrine of Thomas Hobbes”,
Political
Science Quarterly
, 11 (1): 82–104.
Ducos, Michèle, 1987, “Le tableau du droit universel
de Jean Bodin et la tradition romaine”,
Bulletin de
l’Association Guillaume Budé
, 49–61.
Esmein, Adhémar, 1900, “La théorie de
l’intervention internationale chez quelques publicistes
français du XVIe siècle”,
Nouvelle revue
historique du droit français et étranger
, 24:
549–574.
Fabbri, Natacha, 2004, “La concordia nel
Colloquium
heptaplomeres
di Jean Bodin”,
Rinascimento
, 44,
297–324.
Faltenbacher, Karl F., 1985, “Comparaison entre le
Colloquium Heptaplomeres
de Jean Bodin et les
Coloquios y
doctrina cristiana
de Fray Bernardino de Sahagun”, in
Jean Bodin, Actes du Colloque interdisciplinaire d’Angers (mai
1984)
, Angers: Presses Universitaires, II, 453–458,
618–623.
Faltenbacher, K. F., ed., 2002,
Magie, Religion und
Wissenschaften im Colloquium heptaplomeres
. Ergebnisse der
Tagungen in Paris 1994 und in der Villa Vigoni 1999, Darmstadt:
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Faltenbacher, K. F., ed., 2009,
Der kritische Dialog des
Colloquium Heptaplomeres: Wissenschaft, Philosophie und Religion zu
Beginn des 17. Jahrhunderts
.
Ergebnisse der Tagung vom 6. bis
7. November 2006 am Frankreich-Zentrum der Freien Universität
Berlin
, Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft,
Ferrière, Georges, 2004, “Sujets et citoyens selon
Bodin”, in
Sujet et citoyen: actes du Colloque de Lyon,
11–12 septembre 2003
, Aix-en-Provence: Presses
universitaires d’Aix-Marseille.
Ferronato, M., and L. Bianchin, eds., 2011,
Silete theologi in
munere alieno. Alberico Gentili e la seconda scolastica
, Padova:
Cedam.
Fiocchi, Claudio, and Simonetta, Stefano, 2001, “Il
principatus
despoticus
nell’aristotelismo
bassomedievale”, in
Dispotismo. Genesi e sviluppi di un
concetto filosofico-politico
, Domenico Felice ed., tomo I, Napoli:
Liguori, 95–126.
–––, 2004,
Mala Potestas. La Tirannia nel
Pensiero Politico Medioevale
, Bergamo: Lubrina.
–––, 2007,
Dispotismo e libertà nel
pensiero medievale.  Riflessioni all’ombra di Aristotele
(sec.
XIII – XIV)
, Bergamo: Lubrina.
Foisneau, Luc, 1999, “Bodin ou l’affirmation des
droits de la souveraineté”, in
Histoire de la
philosophie politique
, A. Renaut éd., Paris:
Calman-Lévy, 2: 237-250.
–––, 2013, “Sovereignty and Reason of State: Bodin,
Botero, Richelieu and Hobbes”, in Lloyd, ed., 2013,
323–342.
Fontana, Letizia, 2009, “Bilan historiographique de la
question du séjour de Jean Bodin à Genève,”
Bibliothèque d’humanisme et Renaissance
, 71,
101–111.
Fournol, Etienne-Maurice, 2011,
Bodin,
prédécesseur de Montesquieu: étude sur quelques
théories politiques de la
République
et
de
l’Esprit des lois, Geneva: Slatkine.
Franklin, J.H., 1973,
J. Bodin and the Rise of Absolutist
Theory
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
––– ed., 2006,
Jean Bodin
, Aldershot:
Ashgate,
Friedeburg, Robert von, 2011, “
Cuius Regio, Eius
Religio
: The Ambivalent Meanings of State Building in Protestant
Germany, 1555–1655”, in
Diversity and Dissent.
Negotiating Religious Difference in Central Europe,
1500–1800
, edited by Howard Louthan, Gary B. Cohen and Franz
A. J. Szabo, New York: Berghahn Books, 73–91.
–––, 2013, “The Reception of Bodin in the
Holy Roman Empire and the Making of the Territorial State”, in
Lloyd, ed., 2013, 293–322.
Gajda, Alexandra, 2010, “Tacitus and Political Thought in
Early Modern Europe,
c
. 1530-
c
. 1640”, in
The Cambridge Companion to Tacitus
, edited by A.J. Woodman,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 253–68.
García Gestoso, Noemi, 2003,“Sobre los orígenes
históricos y teóricos del concepto de soberanía:
especial referencia a los seis libros de la República de J.
Bodino”,
Revista de estudios políticos
, 120:
301–328.
Gardot, André, 1934, “Jean Bodin: sa place parmi les
fondateurs du droit international”,
Académie de droit
international, Recueil des cours
, 50: 549–753 (Paris: Librairie
du recueil Sirey, 1935; Leiden: Brill, 2008).
Gelderen, Martin van, 2004, “Republikanismus in Europa:
Deutsch-Niederlandische perspektiven 1580–1650”,
Historische Zeitschrift
, 278: 283–309.
Gentili, Alberico, 2008,
Il diritto di guerra [De iure
belli
(1598)], trad. da P. Nencini, a cura di G. Marchetto e C.
Zendri, Milano: Giuffré.
Gianturco, Elio, 1934, “Bodin’s Conception of the
Venetian Constitution and his Critical Rift with Fabio
Albergati”,
Revue de Littérature
comparée
, 18: 684–695.
Giesey, Ralph E., 2004,
Rulership in France, 15th-17th
Centuries
, Aldershot: Ashgate.
–––, 2007,
Le rôle méconnu de la
loi Salique: la succession royale, XIVe-XVIe siècles
,
Paris: Les Belles Lettres.
González Fernández, M., 2007, “Tolerancia(s):
da vaga neoliberal a Jean Bodin”, in
Desafíos do
século XXI
, ed. Francisco Javier Barcia González y
Nel Rodríguez Rial, Santiago de Compostela: Universidad de
Santiago de Compostela, 197–214.
Goyard-Fabre, Simone, 1986,
J. Bodin et le droit de la
République
, Paris: P. U. France.
–––, 1988, “Souveraineté et
citoyenneté dans
Les six livres de la République
de Jean Bodin”,
L’école des lettres. Revue
pédagogique du second cycle
, 80, 2: 47–55.
–––, 1991, “La souveraineté de Bodin
à Hobbes”,
Hobbes Studies
, 4: 3–25.
–––, 1992a, “Jean Bodin et les trois
justices”, in
Aequitas, Aequalitas, Auctoritas. Raison
théorique et légitimation de l’autorité
dans le XVIe siècle
, D. Letocha (ed.), Paris: Vrin,
3–15.
–––, 1992b, “La notion de
souveraineté de Bodin à Hobbes”, in
Hobbes et
son vocabulaire
, Y. Ch.  Zarka éd., Paris: Vrin,
207–230.
–––, 1999,
Jean Bodin (1529 –1596) et sa
politique philosophique
, Paris: Ellipses.
Grafton, Anthony, 2007,
What
was History? The Art of
History in Early Modern Europe
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Greengrass, Mark, 1994, “A Day in the Life of the Third
Estate: Blois, 26 December 1576”, in
Politics, Ideology, and
the Law in Early Modern Europe: Essays in Honor of J.H.M. Salmon
,
edited by Adrianna Bakos, Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press,
73–90.
–––, 2005, ‘Passions and the Patria: Michel
de l’Hospital and the Reformation of the French Polity in the
Wars of Religion’, in
‘Patria’ und
‘Patrioten’ vor dem Patriotismus: Flichten, Rechte, Glauben
und die Rekonfiguriegung europäischer Gemeinwesen im 17.
Jahrhundert
, hrsg. Robert von Friedeburg, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz,
287–308.
–––, 2007a,
Governing Passions: Peace and
Reform in the French kingdom, 1576–1585
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
–––, 2007b, “Money, Majesty and Virtue: The
Rhetoric of Monetary Reform in Later Sixteenth-Century France”,
French History
, 21: 165–186.
–––, 2013, “The Experiential World of Jean
Bodin”, in Lloyd, ed., 2013, 67–96.
–––, 2014,
Christendom Destroyed: Europe
1517–1648
, New York: Penguin.
Harmon, Mont Judd, 1964, “Monarchomachs, Divine Right, and the Theory
of Jean Bodin”, in
Political Thought from Plato to the Present
, 
M. J. Harmon, New York: McGraw-Hill, 196–215.
Hegmann, Horst, 1994,
Politischer Individualismus: die
Rekonstruktion einer Sozialtheorie unter Bezugnahme auf Machiavelli,
Bodin und Hobbes
, Berlin: Duncker & Humblot.
Heller, Henry, 1994, “Bodin on Slavery and Primitive
Accumulation”,
The Sixteenth Century Journal
, 25(1):
53–65.
Herrero Sanchez, Manuel, 2009, “El padre Mariana y el
tiranicidio”,
Torre de los Lujanes
, 65:
103–121.
Holt, Mack P., 1986,
The Duke of Anjou and the Political
Struggle during the Wars of Religion
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Houllemare, Marie, 2011,
Politique de la parole: le Parlement
de Paris au XVIe siècle
, Genève: Droz.
Isnardi Parente, Margherita, 2008,
Rinascimento politico in
Europa
, Studi raccolti da D. Quaglioni e P. Carta, Padova:
Cedam.
Jacobsen, Mogens Chrom, 2000,
J. Bodin et le dilemme de la
philosophie politique moderne
, Copenhagen: Museum Tusculanum
Press.
Jostock, Ingeborg, 2007a,
La censure négociée: le
contrôle du livre à Genève, 1560–1625
,
Genève: Droz.
–––, 2007b, “Réviser Bodin:
l’édition genevoise de la
République
”, in his
La censure
négociée.
Le contrôle du livre à
Genève, 1560–1625
, Genève: Droz, 208–212.
Jouanna, Arlette, 2006, “Capituler avec son prince: la
question de la contractualisation de la loi au XVIe
siècle”, in
“Et de sa bouche sortait un
glaive”: les monarchomaques au XVIe siècle. Actes de la
journée d’étude tenue à Tours en mai
2003
, edited by Paul-Alexis Mellet, Genève: Droz,
131–143
King, Preston, 1999,
The Ideology of Order: A Comparative
Analysis of J. Bodin and Thomas Hobbes
, London: F. Cass.
Krause, Virginia, 2013, “Listening to Witches: Bodin’s
Use of Confession in
De la Démonomanie des
Sorciers
”, in Lloyd, ed., 2013, 97–116.
Krulic, Brigitte, ed., 2010,
Raison(s) d’état(s)
en Europe: traditions, usages, recompositions
, New York: Peter
Lang.
Lassabatère, Thierry, 2010, “Pouvoir royal et bien
commun chez Eustache Deschamps, Nicolas de Herberay et Jean Bodin: une
chaîne de pensée entre Moyen âge et
Renaissance”, in
Pouvoir d’un seul et bien commun
(VIe-XVIe siècles): actes du colloque du 19 décembre
2008, Université Paris-Ouest Nanterre
, edited by Frank
Collard,
Revue française d’histoire et
d’idées politiques
, 32: 395–410.
Lazzarino del Grosso, Anna Maria, 1988, “Nobiltà
e
roture
nel pensiero di Jean Bodin”
in
Gesellschaftgeschichte
. Festschrift für Karls
Bosl zum 80.
Geburtstag
, II, Ferdinand Seibt Hrsg.,
München: Oldenburg, 131–148.
–––, 2002, “La
Respublica
Hebraeorum
come modello politico ‘scientifico’ nella
Methodus
di Jean Bodin”,
Il pensiero politico
,
35: 382–398.
–––, 2004,
Bodin e la critica della
democrazia
, Napoli: Istituto Suor Orsola Benincasa.
–––, 2005, “Jean Bodin e il
problema del potere”, in
Il potere come problema nella
letteratura politica della prima Età moderna
, S. Testoni
Binetti ed., Firenze: Centro Editoriale Toscano, 91–112.
–––, 2007, “Le Magistrature in
Bodin”,
Il pensiero politico
, 40: 394–409.
Lee, Daniel, 2013, “ ‘Office is a Thing
Borrowed’: Jean Bodin on Offices and Seigneurial
Government”,
Political Theory
, 41, 3: 409–440.
–––, 2016, “The Roman Law Foundations of
Bodin’s Early Doctrine of Sovereignty”, ch. 5; “Jean
Bodin, Popular Sovereignty, and Constitutional Government”,
ch. 6, in his
Popular Sovereignty in Early Modern Constitutional
Thought
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 159–224.
Le Thiec, G., 2004, “L’Empire ottoman, modèle de
monarchie seigneuriale dans l’œuvre de Bodin”, in
L’œuvre de Jean Bodin
, éd. G.-A.
 Pérouse
et al
., Paris: H. Champion,
55–77.
Letrouit, Jean, 1995, “Jean Bodin, auteur du
Colloquium
Heptaplomeres
”,
La lettre clandestine
, 4:
38–45.
Levron, Jacques, 1948, “Jean Bodin, Sieur de Saint-Amand ou
Jean Bodin, originaire de Saint-Amand,”
Bibliothèque
d’humanisme et Renaissance
, 10: 69–76 .
–––, 1950,
Jean Bodin et sa famille. Textes et
commentaires
, Angers: H. Siraudeau.
Lewis, J. U., 2006, “Jean Bodin’s ‘Logic of
Sovereignty’”,
Political Studies
, 16:
206–222.
Lloyd, Howell A., 1991, “Sovereignty: Bodin, Hobbes,
Rousseau,”
Revue Internationale de philosophie
, 45, 179,
353–379.
––– ed., 2013,
The Reception of Bodin
,
Leiden, Boston: Brill.
–––, 2017,
Jean Bodin
. ‘
This
Pre-eminent Man of France
’.
An Intellectual
Biography
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lutfalla, M., 2004, “Inflation et endettement:
l’éternelle actualité de Jean Bodin”, In
L’œuvre de Jean Bodin
, éd. G.-A.
 Pérouse
et al
., Paris: H. Champion 285–295.
Machielsen, Jan, 2013, “Bodin in the Netherlands”, in
Lloyd, ed., 2013, 157–192.
Malcolm, Noel, 2006, “Jean Bodin and the Authorship of the
Colloquium Heptaplomeres
,”
Journal of the Warburg
and Courtauld Institutes
, 69: 95–150.
Marabuto, Madeleine, 1963, “Théodore de Bèze et
Jean Boucher: théoriciens de la résistance à la
tyrannie”, Gagny: S. et O.
–––, 1967, “Les théories politiques
des monarchomaques français”, thèse de droit, 2
vols, Université de Paris II.
Marocco Stuardi, Donatella, 2006,
La République di Jean
Bodin: sovranità, governo, giustizia
, Milano: Franco
Angeli.
Mayer, Jacob Peter, ed., 1979,
Fundamental Studies on Jean
Bodin
, New York: Arno Press.
Melani, Igor, 2006,
Il tribunale della storia. leggere la
Methodus
di Jean Bodin
, Firenze: Olschki.
–––, 2012, “
De
rebus singulis rectius
judicare
. Usi della storia, antropologia politica, formazione del
funzionario nella
Methodus
di Jean Bodin”, in
Storici antichi e storici moderni nella
Methodus
di Jean
Bodin
, Giuseppe Zecchini e Alessandro Galimberti ed., Milano: Vita
e Pensiero, 133–172.
Mendras, Henri, 1999, “Le ‘mal de Bodin’. À
la recherche d’une souveraineté perdue”,
Le
Débat
, 105: 71–89.
Mesnard, P., 1929, “La pensée religieuse de
Bodin,”
Revue du seizième siècle
, 16:
77–121.
–––, 1936,
L’essor de la philosophie
politique au XVIe siècle
, Paris: Boivin, 1936 (reprint:
1977).
Miglietti, Sara, 2004,
“
Presenze boeziane nel
Colloquium Heptaplomeres
di Jean Bodin”,
Rinascimento
, 44: 273–295.
–––, 2010, “Amitié, harmonie et paix
politique chez Aristote et Jean Bodin”,
Asterion
, 7,
Lyon, ENS Lettres et Sciences humaines (online journal).
––– (ed.), 2013, J. Bodin,
Methodus ad
facilem historiarum congnitione
, edizione, introduzione e
commento, Pisa: Edizioni della Normale.
–––, 2013, “Reading from the Margins: Some
Insights into the Early Reception of Bodin’s
Methodus
”, in Lloyd, ed., 2013, 193–218.
Mittica, Paola, and Vida, Silvia, 2001, “Dispotismo e
politica in Aristotele”, in
Dispotismo. Genesi e sviluppi di
un concetto filosofico-politico
, Domenico Felice ed., tomo I,
Napoli: Liguori, 1–32.
Moreau-Reibel, Jean, 1933,
J. Bodin et le Droit public
comparé dans ses rapports avec la philosophie de
l’histoire
, Paris, Vrin.
–––, 1935, “J. Bodin et la Ligue
d’après des lettres inédites,”
Humanisme et
Renaissance
, 2: 425–436.
–––, 1950,
Le droit de société
interhumaine et le
‘
jus gentium
’:
essai
sur les origines et le développement des notions
jusqu’à Grotius
, Leiden, Boston: Brill, 2008
(London: Martinus Nijhoff, 1950).
Mosse, George Lachman, 1948, “The Influence of Jean
Bodin’s
Republic
on English Political Thought”,
Medievalia et humanistica
, 5: 73–83.
Nadeau, Christian, 2005, “Les constitutionalistes
français face au problème de la constitution mixte:
Claude de Seyssel et Jean Bodin”, in
Le Gouvernement
mixte.
De l’idéal politique au monstre
constitutionnel en Europe (XIIIe – XVIIe siècle)
,
Marie-Gaille-Nikodimov éd., Publications de
l’Université de Saint-Étienne.
Naef, Henri, 1946, “La jeunesse de Jean Bodin, ou les
conversions oubliées,”
Bibliothèque d’humanisme
et Renaissance
, 8: 137–155.
Nelson, Eric, 2004,
The Greek Tradition in Republican
Thought
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Opitz-Belakhal, Claudia, 2006,
Das Universum des Jean Bodin:
Staatsbildung, Macht und Geschlecht im 16. Jahrhundert
, Frankfurt
am Main, New York: Campus.
–––, 2007, ‘Jean Bodin, Idee und
Interesse’, in
Politische Ideen und Gesellschaftstheorien
seit der frühen Neuzeit
, hrsg. by Helmut Reinalter, Wien:
Braumüller, 115–132.
–––, 2008, “Der Magistrat als
Hexenjäger. Hexenverfolgung und staatliche Ordnung bei Jean
Bodin”, in
Hexenprozess und Staatsbildung/Witch-Trials and
State-Building
, hrsg. Johannes Dillinger und Jurgen Michel
Schmidt, Bielefeld: Verlag für Regionalgeschichte,
41–58.
Paganini, Gianni, 2013, “La ”Civil Conversazione“
nell’epoca delle Guerre di religione: Il
Colloquium
heptaplomeres
di Jean Bodin”, in
L’antidoto di
Mercurio. La “civil conversazione
”
tra
Rinascimento ed età moderna
, a cura di Nicola Panichi,
Firenze: Leo S. Olschki Editore.
Panichi, Nicola, 2004, “Danaé et Jupiter: de la
politique à l’‘oeconomie politique’: Jean
Bodin et Montchrestien”, in
L’œuvre de Jean
Bodin
, éd. G.-A. Pérouse
et al
.,
Paris: H. Champion, 169–206.
Pantin, Isabelle, 2009, “Le
Colloquium heptaplomeres
et sa cosmologie. Le problème de la cohérence du
texte,” in Faltenbacher, ed., 2009, 185–207.
Parinetto, Luigi, 2002,
L’inquisitore libertino: discorso
sulla tolleranza religiosa e sull’ateismo: a proposito
dell’
Heptaplomeres
di Jean Bodin
, Milano:
Terziari.
Périgot, Béatrice, 2004, “La notion de
‘République’ chez Bodin”,
L’œuvre de Jean Bodin
, éd. G.-A.
 Pérouse
et al
., Paris, 39–53.
Petris, Loris, 2002, “
De pace
. Autour d’un
inédit de Michel de l’Hospital: le magistrat et la
‘guerre juste’”,
Bibliothèque
d’humanisme et Renaissance
, 64: 327–346.
Piano Mortari, Vincenzo, 1962,
Diritto romano e diritto
nazionale in Francia nel secolo XVI
, Milano: Giuffré.
–––, 1991, “Aspetti della metodologia
giuridica di J. Bodin”, in his
Itinera juris. Studi di storia
giuridica dell’ età moderna
, Napoli: Jovene,
145–172.
Quaglioni, D., 1992,
I limiti della sovranità: il
pensiero di J. Bodin nella cultura politica e giuridica dell’età
moderna
, Padova: Cedam.
–––, 2003,
À une déesse
inconnue: la conception pré-moderne de la justice
, trad.
M.-D. Couzinet, Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne.
–––, 2010, “Pour une histoire du droit de
guerre au début de l’âge moderne: Bodin, Gentili,
Grotius”, in
Justice et armes au XVIe siècle
,
éd. D. Quaglioni et J.-C. Zancarini,
Laboratoire
italien
, 10: 9–20.
–––, 2013, “The Italian
‘Readers’ of Bodin, 17th–18th Centuries: The Italian
‘Readers’ out of Italy – Alberico Gentili
(1522–1608)”, in Lloyd, ed., 2013, 371–386.
Quarta, Cristina, 2004,
Ayrault e Bodin: diritto, famiglia e
formazione morale nel XVI secolo
, Manduria: P. Lacaita.
Reinhardt, Nicole, 2007, “Juan de Mariana: Bibelexegese und
Tyrannenmord”, in
Die Bibel als politisches Argument:
Voraussetzungen und Folgen biblischer Herrschaftslegitimation in der
Vormoderne
, hrsg. by A. Peçar und K. Trampedach,
München: Oldenbourg, 273–94.
Reulos, Michel, 1970, “Une Institution Romaine vue par un
auteur du XVIe siècle:
la censure
dans Jean
Bodin”,
Études offertes à Jean Maqueron
,
Aix-en-Provence: Faculté de droit et des sciences
économiques, 585–590.
–––, 1982, “Le droit face à la notion de
souveraineté dégagée par Jean Bodin”, in
Diritto e potere nella storia europea
, Atti del IV Congresso
Internazionale della Società Italiana di Storia del diritto in
onore di Bruno Paradisi, Firenze: Olschki, 451–462.
–––, 1984, “Le chapitre VII du livre III
de
La République
de Jean Bodin. Des corps,
collèges et communautés”, in
La
littérature de la Renaissance. Mélanges d’histoire
et de critique littéraires offerts à Henri Weber
,
Marguerite Soulié éd., Genève: Slatkine,
263–276.
Reynolds, Beatrice, 1931,
Proponents of Limited Monarchy in
Sixteenth Century France: Francis Hotman and Jean Bodin
,
Ph.D. dissertaion, Columbia University.
Ribeiro de Barros, Alberto, 2003, “Bodin et le projet
d’une science du droit: la
Juris universi distributio
(1578)”,
Nouvelle revue du XVIe siècle
, 21:
57–70.
Richart, Antoine, 1869,
Mémoires sur la Ligue dans le
Laonnois
, Laon: La Société académique de
Laon.
Richter Melvin, and Burke, Martin J, eds., 2012,
Why Concepts
Matter, Translating Social and Political Thought
, Leiden, Boston:
Brill.
Rose, P.L., 1980,
J. Bodin and the Grand God of Nature.
The Moral and Religious Universe of a Judaiser
, Genève:
Droz.
–––, 1978, “The Politique and the Prophet:
Bodin and the Catholic League 1589–1594”,
The
Historical Journal
, 21(4): 783–808.
Rossin, Nicolai, 2003,
Soveränität zwischen Macht und
Recht.
Probleme der Lehren politischer Souveränität
in der frühen Neuzeit am Beispiel von Machiavelli, Bodin und
Hobbes
, Hamburg: Kovac.
Salmon, John Hearsey McMillan, 1973, “François Hotman
and Jean Bodin: The Dilemma of Sixteenth Century French
Constitutionalism”,
History Today
, 23(11):
801–809.
–––, 1987, “Bodin and the
Monarchomachs”, in his
Renaissance and Revolt. Essays in the Intellectual and Social
History of the Early Modern France
, Cambridge: Cambridge U. P.,
119–135.
–––, 2007, “France”, in
European
Political Thought 1450–1700
, ed. by H. A. Lloyd, G. Burgess and
S. Hodson, New Haven and London: Yale U. P., 458–497.
Scapparone, Elisabetta, 2001, “Concezioni dell’anima: Ficino
e Bodin”,
Rinascimento
, 41: 71–91.
Scattola, Merio, 1996, “Il concetto di tirannide nel pensiero
politico tedesco della prima età moderna”, In
Filosofia politica
, 10: 391–420.
–––, 1999, “Ordine della giustizia e dottrina della
sovranità in Jean Bodin”, in
Il potere. Per la storia
della filosofia politica moderna
, Giuseppe Duso ed., Roma:
Carocci, 61–75.
–––, 2015a, “
Regnum, tyrannis, dominatus
:
l’aristotelismo politico tedesco del primo Seicento di fronte al
problema del potere assoluto”,
Storia del pensiero
politico
, 2015/3: 355–378.
–––, 2015b, “Diritto naturale e diritto di
resistenza nella polemistica luterana di metà
cinquecento”, in
Revista
crítica de Derecho Canónico
Pluriconfesional
, n. 2: 83–108.
–––, 2017, “Before and after Natural
Law”, in
Early Modern Natural Law Theories. Contexts and
Strategies in the Early Enlightenment
, ed. by T. J. Hochstrasser
and P. Schröder, Dordrecht: Springer International Publishing
AG.
Schiffman, Zachary Sayre, 2000, “Jean Bodin, Roman Law, and
the Renaissance Conception of the Past”, in
Cultural Visions:
Essays in the History of Culture
, edited by Penny Schine Gold and
Benjamin C. Sax, Amsterdam: Rodopi, 271–287.
Schüz, Jonathan, 2013, “Bodin’s
Démonomanie
in the German Vernacular”, in Lloyd,
ed., 2013, 237–256.
Sciacca, Enzo, 2005,
Principati e repubbliche: Machiavelli,
politiche e il pensiero francese del Cinquecento
, Firenze:
Editoriale Toscano.
Sebastián Piana, Ricardo, 2009, “Jean Bodin: retomando
su pensamiento en torno a la crisis de la soberanía”,
Revista de derecho y ciencias penales
, 12: 45–58.
Skinner, Quentin, 1978,
The Foundations of Modern Political
Thought
, 2 vols, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 2002,
Visions of Politics
, vol. I:
Regarding Method
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Smith, Constance I., 1963, “Filmer, and the Knolles
Translation of Bodin”,
The Philosophical Quarterly
,
13(52): 248–252.
Spitz, Jean-Fabian, 1998,
Bodin
et la
souveraineté
, Paris: P.U.F.
Straumann, Benjamin, 2016, “Jean Bodin and the Fall of Roman
Republic”, in his
Crisis and Constitutionalism: Roman
Political Thought from the Fall of the Republic to the Age of
Revolution
, New York: Oxford University Press, 278–302.
Suggi, Andrea, 2005,
Sovranità e armonia. La tolleranza
religiosa nel «Colloquium Heptaplomeres» di Jean
Bodin
, Roma: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura.
–––, 2006, ed., J. Bodin,
La Demonomania de
gli stregoni, cioè furori et malie de’ demoni col mezo de gli
Huomini: divisa in libri IIII di Gio. Bodino Francese, Tradotta dal K.
Hercole Cato, In Venetia, Presso Aldo, 1587
, introduzione e
riproduzione anastatica, Roma: Edizioni di Storia e Letteratura.
–––, 2007a, “Una nota su religione e
politica in Bodin. Tra il Paradoxon e la Lettre de Monsieur
Bodin”,
Rinascimento
, 47: 347–365.
–––, 2007b, “Educazione umanistica e pace
religiosa nella ”Oratio de instituenda in
Republica
juventute“ di Jean Bodin”,
Bruniana &
Campanelliana
, 13: 521–536.
––– (ed.), 2009, J. Bodin,
Paradosso sulla
virtù
, Milano: Nino Aragno. Latin Text and Italian
Translation in bilingual Edition of
Jo. Bodini Paradoxon, quod nec
virtus ulla mediocritate, nec summum hominis bonum in virtutibus
actione consistere possit
, Parisiis, excudebat D. Duvallius,
1596.
Tenenti, Alberto, 2001, “Il doppio volto della storia
comparata nella ”Methodus“ di Jean Bodin”,
Rivista di letterature moderne e comparate
, 54:
3–16.
Terrel, Jean, 2001,
Les théories du pacte social: droit
naturel, souveraineté et contrat de Bodin à
Rousseau
, Paris: Seuil.
Thermes, Diana, 2002,
Ripensare Bodin: pubblico e privato nel
cittadino premoderno
, Roma: Philos.
Thiveaud, Emmanuel, 2004, “Finances et souveraineté
dans
les Six Livres de la République
de Bodin”,
in
L’Oeuvre de Jean Bodin
, éd. G.-A.
 Pérouse
et al.
, Paris, 237–257.
Turchetti, M., 1991, “Religious Concord and Political
Tolerance in Sixteenth- and Seventeenth-Century France”,
The
Sixteenth-Century Journal
, 22: 15-25.
–––, 1993, “Une question mal posée:
la qualification de perpétuel et irrévocable
appliquée à l’Édit de Nantes (1598)”,
Bulletin de la Société de l’histoire du
protestantisme français
, 139: 42–78.
–––, 1999, “Middle Parties in France during
the Wars of Religion”, in
Reformation, Revolt and Civil War
in France and the Netherlands, 1555–1585
, Amsterdam: Royal
Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, 165–183.
–––, 2001, “Une question mal posée:
la ”tolérance“ dans les édits de Janvier
(1562) et d’Amboise (1563). Les premiers commentaires et
interprétations: Jean Bégat”, in
La formazione
storica della alterità
.
Studi di storia della
tolleranza nell’étà moderna offerti a Antonio
Rotondò
, promossi da Henry Méchoulan, Richard H.
Popkin
et al
., vol. 1:
Secolo XVI
, Firenze: Olschki,
245–294.
–––, 2002, “Une question mal posée:
l’origine et l’identité des ‘Politiques’ au temps
des guerres de religion”, in
De Michel de l’Hospital à
l’Édit de Nantes
, éd. Thierry Wanegffelen,
Clermont-Ferrand: P. U. Blaise-Pascal, 357-390.
–––, 2007, “Jean Bodin théoricien de
la souveraineté, non de l’absolutisme”, in
Chiesa
cattolica e mondo moderno, Scritti in onore di Paolo Prodi
, a cura
di Adriano Prosepri
et al
., Bologna: Il Mulino,
437–455.
–––, 2008, “Despotism and Tyranny.
Unmasking a Tenacious Confusion,”
European Journal of
Political Theory
, 7: 159–182.
–––, 2009, “The Contribution of Calvin and
Calvinism to the Birth of Modern Democracy”, in
John
Calvin’s Impact on Church and Society, 1509–2009
,
edited by Martin Ernst Hirzel and Martin Sallmann, Grand Rapids,
Michigan: Eerdmans Publishing Co., 192–217.
–––, 2012, “Bodin as Self-Translator of his
République
: Why the Omission of
”
Politicus
“ and Allied Terms from the Latin
Version”, in
Why Concepts Matter
, edited by M. Richter,
Leiden, Boston: Brill, 109–118.
–––, 2013,
Tyrannie et tyrannicide de
l’Antiquité à nos jours
, 2nd ed., Paris: Classiques
Garnier (first edition, 2001).
–––, 2018, “La leçon de Jean Bodin
(1530–1596) sur la distinction « vitale »,,
oubliée, entre despotisme et tyrannie”, in
Le prince, le despote, le tyran. Figures du souverain en Europe,
de la Renaissance aux Lumières
, Myriam-Isabelle Ducrocq
and Laïla Ghermani (eds.), Paris: Honoré Champion,
51–74.
Tutino, Stefania, 2007, “Huguenots, Jesuits and Tyrants:
Notes on the
Vindiciae Contra Tyrannos
in Early Modern
England”,
Journal of Early Modern History
, 11:
175–196.
–––, 2010,
Empire of Souls: Robert Bellarmine
and the Christian Commonwealth
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Ulph, Owen, 2006, “Jean Bodin and the Estates-General of
1576”, in Franklin, ed., 2006, 201–209.
Valente, Michaela, 2012, “Storia e politica. Bodin e gli
storici coevi della
Methodus
”, in
Storici antichi e
storici moderni nella
Methodus
di Jean Bodin
, G. Zecchini
ed., Milano: Vita e Pensiero, 109–132.
–––, 2013, “The Works of Bodin under the Lens
of Roman Theologians and Inquisitors”, in Lloyd, ed., 2013,
219–236.
Vasoli, Cesare, 2008,
Armonia e giustizia: studi sulle idee
filosofiche di Jean Bodin
, edited by A. E. Baldini: Firenze,
Olschki.
Villey, Michel, 1970, “La justice harmonique selon
Bodin”,
Archives de philosophie du droit
, 15:
301–315.
Weber, Henri, 1986, “Utilisation de la
Politique
d’Aristote dans la
République
de Bodin”, in his
A travers le XVIe siècle
, vol. 2:
Histoire des
idées
, Paris: Nizet, 137–146.
Weber, Hermann, 1987, “Jean Bodin et la vérité
historique”,
Certitudes et incertitudes de l’histoire.
Trois colloques sur l’Histoire de l’Institut collégial
européen, éd. Gilbert Gadoffre, Paris: Presses Universitaires de France,
77–86.
Weill, Georges J., 1891,
Les théories sur le pouvoir
royal en France pendant les guerres de religion
, Paris (reprint
1971).
Weiss, Nathaniel, 1889,
La Chambre ardente, étude sur la
liberté de conscience en France sous François Ier et
Henri II, 1540–1550, suivie d’environ 5000 arrêts
inédits, rendus par le Parlement de Paris de mai 1547 à
mars 1550
, Paris: Fischbacher.
–––, 1923, “Huguenots emprisonnés
à la Conciergerie du Palais de Paris en mars 1569”,
Bulletin de la Société de l’Histoire du
Protestantisme Français
, 21: 87–89.
Wier, Jean, 1579,
Histoires, disputes et discours des illusions
et impostures des diables, des magiciens infâmes,
sorcières et empoisonneurs: des ensorceléz et demoniaques
et de la guerision d’iceux; item de la punition que meritent les
magiciens, les empoissoneurs, et les sorcieres; le tout compris en six
libres augmentez de moitié en cest derniere edition. Deux
dialogues [de Thomas Erastus] … touchant le pouvoir des
sorcieres: et de la punition qu’elles meritent
, Paris, Jacques
Chouet (Latin ed., Basel, 1568).
Wilson, John F., 2008, “Royal Monarchy:
‘Absolute’ Sovereignty in Jean Bodin’s
Six Books of the
Republic
”,
Interpretation: a Journal of Political
Philosophy
, 35, 241–264.
Wolff, Jacques, 1985, “Les finances publiques chez Bodin et
Boisguilbert”, in
Mélanges offerts à Max
Cluseau
, publiés par l’ESC Toulouse et l’Université
des Sciences Sociales, Toulouse: Presses I.E.P., 699–711.
Wolodkiewicz, Witold, 1985, “Bodin et le droit privé
romain”, in
Jean Bodin. Actes du colloque interdisciplinaire
d’Angers (24–27 mai 1984)
, vol. 1, Angers,
303–312.
Wootton, David, 2002, “Pseudo-Bodin’s
Colloquium
Heptaplomeres
and Bodin’s
Démonomanie
”, in
Faltenbacher, ed., 2002, 175–225.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Bodin Project
,
 originally based at the University of Hull, now at Harvard.
Six Books of the Commonwealth by Jean Bodin
,
 Abridged and translated by M. J. Tooley, 1955, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Colloquium Heptaplomeres
,
  Project Gutenberg.
Related Entries
Aristotle
|
Cicero
|
constitutionalism
|
history, philosophy of
|
Hobbes, Thomas
|
Locke, John
|
Machiavelli, Niccolò
|
Montesquieu, Charles-Louis de Secondat, Baron de
|
Plato
|
republicanism
|
rights
|
sovereignty
|
theology, natural and natural religion
Acknowledgments
The editors would like to thank James Blakeley for his efforts in
translating this piece from French to English. He continued to provide
help with the final version long after he was required to do so.  The
editors would also like to thank Jill Kraye for her editorial work on
this entry. Mark Greengrass assisted in translating the revisions to
the text in 2010, 2014, and 2018.