Jean-Paul Sartre
First published Sat Mar 26, 2022
Few philosophers have been as famous in their own life-time as
Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–80). Many thousands of Parisians packed
into his public lecture,
Existentialism is a Humanism
,
towards the end of 1945 and the culmination of World War 2. That
lecture offered an accessible version of his difficult treatise,
Being and Nothingness
(1943), which had been published two
years earlier, and it also responded to contemporary Marxist and
Christian critics of Sartre’s “existentialism”.
Sartre was much more than just a traditional academic philosopher,
however, and this begins to explain his renown. He also wrote highly
influential works of literature, inflected by philosophical concerns,
like
Nausea
(1938),
The Roads to Freedom
trilogy
(1945–49), and plays like
No Exit
(1947),
Flies
(1947), and
Dirty Hands
(1948), to name just a
few. He founded and co-edited
Les Temps Modernes
and
mobilised various forms of political protest and action. In short, he
was a celebrity and public intellectual par excellence, especially in
the period after Liberation through to the early 1960s. Responding to
some calls to prosecute Sartre for civil disobedience, the then French
President Charles de Gaulle replied that you don’t arrest
Voltaire.
While Sartre’s public renown remains, his work has had less
academic attention in the last thirty or so years ago, and earlier in
France, dating roughly from the rise of
“post-structuralism” in the 1960s. Although Gilles Deleuze
dedicated an article to his “master” in 1964 in the wake
of Sartre’s attempt to refuse the Nobel Prize for literature
(Deleuze 2004), Michel Foucault influentially declared Sartre’s
late work was a “magnificent and pathetic attempt of a man of
the nineteenth century to think the twentieth century” (Foucault
1966 [1994: 
 541–2])
[
1
]
.
 In this entry, however, we seek to show what remains alive and of
ongoing philosophical interest in Sartre, covering many of the most
important insights of his most famous philosophical book,
Being
and Nothingness
. In addition, significant parts of his oeuvre
remain under-appreciated and thus we seek to introduce them. Little
attention has been given to Sartre’s earlier, psychologically
motivated philosophical works, such as
Imagination
(1936) or
its sequel,
The Imaginary
(1940). Likewise, few philosophers
have seriously grappled with Sartre’s later works, including his
massive two-volume
Critique of Dialectical Reason
(1960), or
his various works in existential psychoanalysis that examine the works
of Genet and Baudelaire, as well as his multi-volume masterpiece on
Flaubert,
The Family Idiot
(1971–2). These are amongst
the works of which Sartre was most proud and we outline some of their
core ideas and claims.
1. Life and Works
2. Transcendence of the Ego: The Discovery of Intentionality
3. Imagination, Phenomenology and Literature
4. Being and Nothingness
4.1. Negation and freedom
4.2 Bad faith and the critique of Freudian psychoanalysis
4.3 The Look, shame and intersubjectivity
5. Existential Psychoanalysis and the Fundamental Project
6. Existentialist Marxism: Critique of Dialectical Reason
7. Politics and Anti-Colonialism
Bibliography
A. Primary Literature
B. Secondary literature
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Life and Works
Sartre’s life has been examined by many biographies, starting
with Simone de Beauvoir’s
Adieux
(and, subsequently,
Cohen-Solal 1985; Levy 2003; Flynn 2014; Cox 2019). Sartre’s
own literary “life” exemplifies trends he thematized in
both
Words
and
Being and Nothingness
, summed up by
his claim that “to be dead is to be prey for the living”
(Sartre 1943 [1956: 543]). Sartre himself was one of the first to
undertake such an autobiographical effort, via his evocation of his
own childhood in
Words
(1964a)—in which Sartre applies
to himself his method of existential psychoanalysis, thereby
complicating this life/death binary.
Like many of his generation, Sartre lived through a series of major
cultural and historical events that his existential philosophy
responded to and attempted to shape. He was born in 1905 and died in
1980, spanning most of the twentieth century and the trajectory that
the Marxist historian Eric Hobsbawm refers to as the “age of
extremes”, a period that was also well-described in the middle
of that century in Albert Camus’
The Rebel
,
notwithstanding that the reception of Camus’ book in
Les
Temps Modernes
in 1951–2 caused Sartre and Camus to very
publicly fall out.
The major events of Sartre’s life seem relatively clear, at
least viewed from an external perspective. A child throughout World
War 1, he was a young man during the Great Depression but born into
relative affluence, brought up by his grandmother. At least as
presented in
Word
s, Sartre’s childhood was filled with
books, the dream of posterity and immortality in those books, and in
which he grappled with his loss of the use of one eye and encountered
the realities of his own appearance revealed through his
mother’s look after a haircut—suffice to say, he was not
classically beautiful.
Sartre’s education, by contrast, was classical—the
École Normale Supérieure. His education at the ENS was
oriented around the history of philosophy, and the influential
bifurcation of that time between the neo-Kantianism of Brunschvicg and
the vitalism of Bergson. While Sartre failed his first attempt at the
aggregation, apparently by virtue of being overly ambitious, on
repeating the year he topped the class (de Beauvoir was second, at her
first attempt and at the age of 21, then the youngest to complete).
Sartre then taught philosophy at various schools, notably at Le Havre
from 1931–36 and while he was composing his early philosophy and
his great philosophical novel,
Nausea
. He never entered a
classical university position.
Although Sartre’s philosophical encounter with phenomenology had
already occurred (around 1933), which de Beauvoir described as causing
him to turn pale with emotion (de Beauvoir 1960 [1962: 112]), with the
onset of World War 2 Sartre merged those philosophical concerns with
more obviously existential themes like freedom, authenticity,
responsibility, and anguish, as translated into English from the
French
angoisse
by both Hazel Barnes and Sarah Richmond. He
was a Meteorologist in Alsace in the war and was captured by the
German Army in 1940 and imprisoned for just under a year (see
War
Diaries
). During this socio-political turmoil, Sartre remained
remarkably prolific.  Notable publications include his play,
No
Exit
(1947),
Being and Nothingness
(1943), and then
completing
Existentialism is a Humanism
(1946),
Anti-semite and Jew
(1946), and founding and
coediting
Les Temps Modernes
, commencing from 1943
(Sartre’s major contributions are collected in his
series
Situations
, especially volume V).
Sartre continued to lead various social and political protests after
that period, especially concerning French colonialism (see
section 7
below). By the time of the student revolutions in May 1968 he was no
longer quite the dominant cultural and intellectual force he had been,
but he did not retreat from public life and engagement and died in
1980. Estimates of the numbers of those attending his funeral
procession in Paris range from 50–100,000 people. Sartre had
been in the midst of a collaboration with Benny Levy regarding ethics,
the so-called “Hope Now” interviews, whose status remain
somewhat controversial in Sartrean scholarship, given the interviews
were produced in the midst of Sartre’s illness and shortly
before he died, and the fact that the relevant audio-recordings are
not publicly available.
2. Transcendence of the Ego: The Discovery of Intentionality
One of the most famous foundational moments of existentialism concerns
Sartre’s discovery of phenomenology around the turn of 1932/3,
when in a Parisian bar listening to his friend Raymond Aron’s
description of an apricot cocktail (de Beauvoir 1960 [1962: 135]).
From this moment, Sartre was fascinated by the originality and novelty
of Husserl’s method, which he identified straight away as a
means to fulfil his own philosophical expectations: overcoming the
opposition between idealism and realism; getting a view on the world
that would allow him “to describe objects just as he saw and
touched them, and extract philosophy from the process”. Sartre
became immediately acquainted with Emmanuel Levinas’s early
translation of Husserl’s
Cartesian Meditations
and his
introductory book on Husserl’s theory of intuition. He spent the
following year in Berlin, so as to study more closely Husserl’s
method and to familiarise himself with the works of his students,
Heidegger and Scheler. With Levinas, and then later with
Merleau-Ponty, Ricœur, and Tran Duc Thao, Sartre became one of
the first serious interpreters and proponent of Husserl’s
phenomenology in France.
While he was studying in Berlin, Sartre tried to convert his study of
Husserl into an article that documents his enthusiastic discovery of
intentionality. It was published a few years later under the title
“Intentionality: a fundamental idea of Husserl’s
phenomenology”. This article, which had considerable influence
over the early French reception of phenomenology, makes explicit the
reasons Sartre had to be fascinated by Husserl’s descriptive
approach to consciousness, and how he managed to merge it with his
previous philosophical concerns. Purposefully leaving aside the
idealist aspects of Husserl’s transcendental phenomenology,
Sartre proposes a radicalisation of intentionality that stresses its
anti-idealistic potential. Against the French contemporary versions of
neo-Kantianism (Brochard, Lachelier), and more particularly against
the kind of idealism advocated by Léon Brunschvicg, Sartre
famously claims that intentionality allows us to discard the
metaphysical oppositions between the inner and outer and to renounce
to the very notion of the interiority of consciousness. If it is true,
as Husserl states, that every consciousness is consciousness
of
something, and if intentionality accounts for this
fundamental direction that orients consciousness towards its object
and beyond itself, then, Sartre concludes, the phenomenological
description of intentionality does away with the illusion that makes
us responsible for the way the world appears to us. According to
Sartre’s radicalised reading of Husserl’s thesis,
intentionality is intrinsically realistic: it lets the world appear to
consciousness
as it really is
, and not as a mere correlate of
an intellectual act. This realistic interpretation, being perfectly in
tune with Sartre’s lifelong ambition to provide a philosophical
account of the contingency of being—its non-negotiable lack of
necessity—convinced him to adopt Husserl’s method of
phenomenological description.
While he was still in Berlin, Sartre also began to work on a more
personal essay, which a few years later resulted in his first
significant philosophical contribution,
Transcendence of the
Ego
. With this influential essay Sartre engages in a much more
critical way with the conception of the “transcendental
ego” presented in Husserl’s
Ideas
and defends his
realistic interpretation of intentionality against the idealistic
tendencies of Husserl’s own phenomenology after the publication
of
Logical Investigations
. Stressing the irreducible
transparency of intentional experience—its fundamental
orientation beyond itself towards its object, whatever this object may
be—Sartre distinguishes between the dimensions of our subjective
experiences that are pre-reflectively lived through, and the
reflective stance thanks to which one can always make their experience
the intentional object towards which consciousness is oriented. One of
Sartre’s most fundamental claims in
Transcendence of the
Ego
is that these two forms of consciousness cannot and must not
be mistaken with one another: reflexive consciousness is a form of
intentional consciousness that takes one’s own lived-experiences
as its specific object, whereas pre-reflexive consciousness need not
involve the intentional distance to the object that the act of
reflection entails. In regard to self-consciousness, Sartre argues
there is an immediate and non-cognitive form of self-awareness, as
well as reflective forms of self-consciousness. The latter is unable
to give access to oneself as the
subject
of unreflected
consciousness, but only as the intentional
object
of the act
of reflection, i.e., the Ego in Sartre’s terminology. The Ego is
the specific object that intentional consciousness is directed upon
when performing reflection—an object that consciousness
“posits and grasps […] in the same act” (Sartre
1936a [1957: 41; 2004: 5]), and that is constituted in and by the act
of reflection (Sartre 1936a [1957: 80–1; 2004: 20]). Instead of
a transcendental subject, the Ego must consequently be understood as a
transcendent object similar to any other object, with the only
difference that it is given to us through a particular kind of
experience, i.e., reflection. The Ego, Sartre argues, “is
outside,
in the world
. It is a being of the world, like the
Ego of another” (Sartre 1936a [1957: 31; 2004: 1]).
This critique of the transcendental Ego is less opposed to Husserl
than it may seem, notwithstanding Sartre’s reservations about
the transcendental radicalisation of Husserl’s phenomenology.
The neo-Humean claim that the “I” or Ego is nowhere to be
found “within” ourselves remains faithful to the 5th
Logical Investigation
, in which Husserl had initially
followed the very same line of reasoning (see Husserl 1901 [2001: vol.
2, 91–93]), before developing a transcendental methodology that
substantially modified his approach to subjectivity (as exposed in
particular in Husserl 1913 [1983]). However, for the Husserl of the
Ideas Pertaining to a Phenomenology
(published in 1913), the
sense in which a perceptual object, which is necessarily seen from one
side but also presented to us as a unified object (involving other
unseen sides), requires that there be a unifying structure within
consciousness itself: the transcendental ego. Sartre argues that such
an account would entail that the perception of an object would always
also involve an intermediary perception—such as some kind of
perception or consciousness of the transcendental ego—thus
threatening to disrupt the “transparency” or
“translucidity” of consciousness. All forms of perception
and consciousness would involve (at least) these two components, and
there would be an opaqueness to consciousness that is not
phenomenologically apparent. In addition, it appears that
Husserl’s transcendental ego would have to pre-exist all of our
particular actions and perceptions, which is something that the
existentialist dictum “existence precedes essence”, which
we will explicate shortly, seems committed to denying. Without
considering here the extent to which Husserl can be defended against
these charges, Sartre’s general claim is that the notion of a
self or ego is not given in experience. Rather, it is something that
is not immanent but transcendent to pre-reflective experience. The Ego
is the transcendent
object
of one’s reflexive
experience, and not the subject of the pre-reflective experience that
was initially lived (but not known).
Sartre devotes a great deal of effort to establishing the impersonal
(or “pre-personal”) character of consciousness, which
stems from its non-egological structure and results directly from the
absence of the
I
in the transcendental field. According to
him, intentional (positional) consciousness typically involves an
anonymous and “impersonal” relation to a transcendent
object:
When I run after a streetcar, when I look at the time, when I am
absorbed in contemplating a portrait, there is no
I.
[…] In fact I am plunged in the world of objects; it is they
which constitute the unity of my consciousness; […] but
me,
I have disappeared; I have annihilated myself. There is
no place for
me
on this level. (Sartre 1936a [1957: 49; 2004:
8])
The tram appears to me
in a specific way
(as
“having-to-be-overtaken”, in this case) that is
experienced as its
own
mode of phenomenalization, and not as
a mere relational aspect of its appearing to
me
. The object
presents itself as carrying a set of objective properties that are
strictly independent from one’s personal relation to it. The
streetcar is experienced as a transcendent object, in a way that
obliterates and
overrides
, so to speak, the subjective
features of conscious experience; its
“having-to-be-overtaken-ness” does not belong to my
subjective
experience of the world but to the
objective
description of the way the world is (see also
Sartre 1936a [1957: 56; 2004: 10–11]). When I run after the
streetcar, my consciousness is absorbed in the relation to its
intentional object, “
the
streetcar-having-to-be-overtaken
”, and there is no trace of
the “I” in such lived-experience. I do not need to be
aware of my intention to take the streetcar, since the object itself
appears as having-to-be-overtaken, and the subjective properties of my
experience disappear in the intentional relation to the object. They
are lived-through without any reference to the experiencing subject
(or to the fact that this experience has to be experienced
by
someone
). This particular feature derives from the diaphanousness
of lived-experiences. In a different example of this, Sartre argues
that when I perceive Pierre as loathsome, say, I do not perceive my
feeling of hatred; rather, Pierre repulses me and I experience
him
as repulsive (Sartre 1936a [1957: 63–4; 2004: 13]).
Repulsiveness constitutes an essential feature of
his
distinctive mode of appearing, rather than a trait of
my
feelings towards him. Sartre concludes that reflective statements
about one’s Ego cannot be logically derived from non-reflective
(“
irréfléchies
”) lived-experiences:
Thus to say “I hate” or “I love” on the
occasion of a singular consciousness of attraction or repulsion, is to
carry out a veritable passage to the infinite […] Nothing more
is needed for the rights of reflection to be singularly limited: it is
certain that Pierre repulses me, yet it is and will remain forever
doubtful that I hate him. Indeed, this affirmation infinitely exceeds
the power of reflection. (Sartre 1936a [1957: 63–4; 2004: 13])
This critique of the powers of reflection forms one important part of
Sartre’s argument for the primacy of pre-reflective
consciousness over reflective consciousness, which is central to many
of the pivotal arguments of
Being and Nothingness
, as we
indicate in the relevant sections below.
3. Imagination, Phenomenology and Literature
For many of his readers, the book on the
Imaginary
that
Sartre published in 1940 constitutes one of the most rigorous and
fruitful developments of his Husserl-inspired phenomenological
investigations. Along with the
The Emotions: Outline of a
Theory
which was published one year before (Sartre 1939b), Sartre
presented this study of imagination as an essay in phenomenological
psychology, which drew on his lifetime interest in psychological
studies and brought to completion the research on imagination he had
undertaken since the very beginning of his philosophical career. With
this new essay, Sartre continues to explore the relationship between
intentional consciousness and reality by focusing upon the specific
case of the intentional relations to the unreal and the fictional, so
as to produce an in-depth analysis of “the great
‘irrealizing’ function of consciousness”. Engaging
in a detailed discussion with recent psychological research that
Sartre juxtaposes with (and against) fine-grained phenomenological
descriptions of the structures of imagination, his essay proposes his
own theory of the imaginary as the corollary of a specific intentional
attitude that orients consciousness towards the unreal.
In a similar fashion to his analysis of the world-shaping powers of
emotions (Sartre 1939b), Sartre describes and highlights how
imagination presents us with a coherent world, although made of
objects that do not precede but
result
from the imaging
capacities of consciousness. “The object as imaged, Sartre
claims, is never anything more than the consciousness one has of
it” (Sartre 1940 [2004: 15]). Contrary to other modes of
consciousness such as perception or memory, which connect us to a
world that is essentially one and the same, the objects to which
imaginative consciousness connects us belong to imaginary worlds,
which may not only be extremely diverse, but also follow their own
rules, having their own spatiality and temporality. The island of
Thrinacia where Odysseus lands on his way back to Ithaca needs not be
located anywhere on our maps nor have existed at a specific time: its
mode of existence is that of a fictional object, which possesses its
own spatiality and temporality within the imaginary world it belongs
to.
Sartre stresses that the intentional dimension of imaging
consciousness is essentially characterised by its
negativity.
The negative act, Sartre writes, is “constitutive of the
image” (Sartre 1940 [2004: 183]): an image consciousness is a
consciousness of something that
is not
, whether its object is
absent, non-existing, or fictional. When we picture Odysseus sailing
back to his native island, Odysseus is given to us “as absent to
intuition”. In this sense, Sartre concludes,
one can say that the image has wrapped within it a certain
nothingness. […] However lively, appealing, strong the image,
it gives its object as not being. (Sartre 1940 [2004: 14])
The irrealizing function of imagination results from this immediate
consciousness of the nothingness of its object. Sartre’s essay
investigates how imaging consciousness allows us to operate with its
objects as if they were present, even though these very objects are
given to us as non-existing or absent. This is for instance what
happens when we go to the theatre or read a novel:
To be present at a play is to apprehend the characters on the actors,
the forest of
As You Like It
on the cardboard trees. To read
is to realize contact with the irreal world on the signs. In this
world there are plants, animals, fields, towns, people: initially
those mentioned in the book and then a host of others that are not
named but are in the background and give this world its depth. (Sartre
1940 [2004: 64])
The irreality of imaginary worlds does not prevent the spectator or
reader from projecting herself into this world
as if it was
real
. The acts of imagination can consequently be described as
“magical acts” (Sartre 1940 [2004: 125]), similar to
incantations with respect to the way they operate, since they are
designed to make the object of one’s thought or desire appear in
such a way that one can take possession of it.
In the conclusion of his essay, Sartre stresses the philosophical
significance of the relationship between imagination and freedom,
which are both necessarily involved in our relationship to the world.
Imagination, Sartre writes, “is the whole of consciousness as it
realizes its freedom” (Sartre 1940 [2004: 186]). Imaging
consciousness posits its object as “out of reach” in
relation to the world understood as the synthetic totality within
which consciousness situates itself. For Sartre, the imaginary
creation is only possible if consciousness is not placed
“in-the-midst-of-the-world” as one existent among others.
For consciousness to be able to imagine, it must be able to escape
from the world by its very nature, it must be able to stand back from
the world by its own efforts. In a word, it must be free. (Sartre 1940
[2004: 184])
In that respect, the irrealizing function of imagination allows
consciousness to “surpass the real” so as to constitute it
as a proper
world
: “the nihilation of the real is
always implied by its constitution as a world”. This capacity of
surpassing the real to make it a proper world defines the very notion
of “situation” that becomes central in Sartre’s
philosophical thought after the publication of the
Imaginary
.
Situations are nothing but “the different immediate modes of
apprehension of the real as a world” (Sartre 1940 [2004: 185]).
Consciousness’ situation-in-the-world is precisely that which
motivates the constitution of any irreal object and accounts for the
creation of imaginary worlds—for instance, and perhaps above
all, in art:
Every apprehension of the real as a world tends of its own accord to
end up with the production of irreal objects since it is always, in a
sense, free nihilation of the world and this always from a particular
point of view. (Sartre 1940 [2004: 185])
With this conclusion, which prioritises the question of the world over
that of reality, Sartre begins to move away from the realist
perspective he was initially aiming at when he first discovered
phenomenology, so as to make the phenomenological investigation of our
“being-in-the-world” (influenced by his careful rereading
of Heidegger in the late 30s) his new priority.
Although Sartre never stated it explicitly, his interest in the
question of the unreal and imaging consciousness appears to be
intimately connected with his general conception of literature and his
self-understanding of his own literary production. The concluding
remarks of the
Imaginary
extend the scope of Sartre’s
phenomenological analyses of the irrealizing powers of imagination, by
applying them to the domain of aesthetics so as to answer the question
about the ontological status of works of art. For Sartre, any product
of artistic creation—a novel, a painting, a piece of music, or a
theatre play—is just as irreal an object as the imaginary world
it gives rise to. The irreality of the work of art allows us to
experience—though only imaginatively—the world it gives
flesh to as an “analogon” of reality. Even a cubist
painting, which might not depict nor represent anything, still
functions as an analogon, which manifests
an irreal ensemble of
new things
, of objects that I have
never seen nor will ever see but that are nonetheless irreal objects.
(Sartre 1940 [2004: 191])
Likewise, the novelist, the poet, the dramatist, constitute irreal
objects through verbal analogons.
This original conception of the nature of the work of art dominates
Sartre’s critical approach to literature in the many essays he
dedicates to the art of the novel. This includes his critical analyses
of recent writers’ novels in the 30s—Faulkner, Dos Passos,
Hemingway, Mauriac, etc.—and the publication in the late 40s of
his own summative view,
What is literature?
(Sartre 1948a
[1988]). In a series of articles gathered in the first volume of his
Situations
(1947,
Sit. I
), Sartre defends a strong
version of literary realism that can, somewhat paradoxically, be read
as a consequence of his theory of the irreality of the work of art. If
imagination projects the spectator within the imaginary world created
by the artist, then the success of the artistic process is
proportional to the capacity of the artwork to let the spectator
experience it as a reality of its own, giving rise to a full-fledged
world. Sartre applies in particular this analysis to novels, which
must aim, according to him, at immersing the reader within the
fictional world they depict so as to make her experience the events
and adventures of the characters
as if
she was living them in
first person. The complete absorption of the reader within the
imaginary world created by the novelist must ultimately recreate the
particular feel of reality that defines Sartre’s
phenomenological
kind of literary realism (Renaudie 2017),
which became highly influential over the following decades in French
literature. The reader must be able to experience the actions of the
characters of the novel as if they did not result from the imagination
of the novelist, but proceeded from the character’s own
freedom—and Sartre goes as far as to claim that this radical
“spellbinding” (“envoûtante”, Sartre
1940 [2004: 175])) quality of literary fiction defines the touchstone
of the art of the novel (See “François Mauriac and
Freedom”, in Sartre
Sit. I
).
This original version of literary realism is intrinsically tied to the
question of freedom, and opposed to the idea according to which
realist literature is expected to provide a mere description of
reality
as it is
. In
What is Literature?
, Sartre
describes the task of the novelist as that of disclosing the world as
if it arose from human freedom—rather than from a deterministic
chain of causes and consequences. The author’s art consists in
obliging her reader “to
create
what [she]
discloses
”, and so to share with the writer the
responsibility and freedom involved in the act of literary creation
(Sartre 1948a [1988: 61]). In order for the world of the novel to
offer its maximum density,
the disclosure-creation by which the reader discovers it must also be
an imaginary engagement in the action; in other words, the more
disposed one is to change it, the more alive it will be.
The conception of the writer’s engagement that resulted from
these analyses constitutes probably the most well-known aspect of
Sartre’s relation to literature. The writer only has one topic:
freedom.
This analysis of the role of imaginative creations of art can also
help us to understand the role of philosophy within his own novels,
particularly in
Nausea
, a novel which Sartre began as he was
studying Husserl in Berlin. In this novel Sartre’s
pre-phenomenological interest for the irreducibility of contingency
intersects with his newly-acquired competences in phenomenological
analyses, making
Nausea
a beautifully illustrated expression
of the metaphysical register Sartre gave to Husserl’s conception
of intentionality. The feeling of nausea that Roquentin, the main
character of Sartre’s novel, famously experienced in a public
garden while obsessively watching a chestnut tree, accounts for his
sensitivity to the absolute lack of necessity of whatever exists.
Sartre understands this radical absence of necessity as the expression
of the fundamental contingency of being. Roquentin’s traumatic
moment of realisation that there is absolutely no reason for the
existence of all that exists illustrates the intuition that motivated
Sartre’s philosophical thinking since the very beginning of his
intellectual career as a student at the Ecole Normale
Supérieure, as Simone de Beauvoir recalls (1981 [1986]). It
constitutes the metaphysical background of his interpretation of
intentionality, which he would come to develop and systematise in the
early dense parts of
Being and Nothingness
. While the
experience of nausea when confronting the contingency of the chestnut
tree does not give us conceptual knowledge, it involves a form of
non-conceptual ontological awareness that is of a fundamentally
different order to, and cannot be derived from, our conceptual
understanding and knowledge of brute existence.
4. Being and Nothingness
4.1. Negation and freedom
Being and Nothingness
(1943) remains the defining treatise of
the existentialist “movement”, along with works from de
Beauvoir from this period (e.g.,
The Ethics of Ambiguity
). We
cannot do justice to the entirety of the book here, but we can
indicate the broad outlines of the position. In brief, Sartre provides
a series of arguments for the necessary freedom of “human
reality” (his gloss on Heidegger’s conception of Dasein),
based upon an ontological distinction between what he calls
being-for-itself (
pour soi
) and being-in-itself (
en
soi
), roughly between that which negates and transcends
(consciousness) and the "pure plenitude" of objects. That kind of
metaphysical position might seem to “beg the question” by
assuming what it purports to establish (i.e., radical human freedom).
However, Sartre argues that realism and idealism cannot sufficiently
account for a wide range of phenomena associated with negation. He
also draws on the direct evidence of phenomenological experience
(i.e., the experience of anguish). But the argument for his
metaphysical picture and human freedom is, on balance, an inference to
the best explanation. He contends that his complex metaphysical vision
best captures and explains central aspects of human reality.
As the title of the book suggests, nothingness plays a significant
role. While Sartre’s concern with nothingness might be a
deal-breaker for some, following Rudolph Carnap’s trenchant
criticisms of Heidegger’s idea that the “nothing
noths/nothings” (depending on translation from the German),
Sartre’s account of negation and nothingness (the latter of
which is the ostensible ground of the former) is nevertheless
philosophically interesting. Sartre does not say much about the
genesis of consciousness or the for-itself, other than that it is
contingent and arises from “the effort of an in-itself to found
itself” (Sartre 1943 [1956: 84]). He describes the appearance of
the for-itself as the absolute event, which occurs through
being’s attempt “to remove contingency from its
being”. Accordingly, the for-itself is radically and inescapably
distinct from the in-itself. In particular, it functions primarily
through negation, whether in relation to objects, values, meaning, or
social facts. According to Sartre this negation is not about any
reflective judgement or cognition, but an ontological relation to the
world. This ontological interpretation of negation minimises the
subjectivist interpretations of his philosophy. The most vivid example
he provides to illustrate this pre-reflective negation is the
apprehension of Pierre’s absence from a café. Sartre
describes Pierre’s absence as pervading the whole café.
The café is cast in the metaphorical “shade” of
Pierre not being there at the time he had been expected. This
experience depends on human expectations, of course. But Sartre argues
that if, by contrast, we imagine or reflect that someone else is not
present (say the Duke of Wellington, an elephant, etc.), these
abstract negative facts are not existentially given in the same manner
as our pre-reflective encounter with Pierre’s absence. They are
not given as an “objective fact”, as a “component of
the real”.
Sartre provides numerous other examples of pre-reflective negation
throughout
Being and Nothingness
. He argues that the
apprehension of fragility and destruction are likewise premised on
negativity, and any effort to adequately describe these phenomena
requires negative concepts, but also that they presuppose more than
just negative thoughts and judgements. In regard to destruction,
Sartre suggests that there is not
less
after the storm, just
something else (Sartre 1943 [1956: 8]). Generally, we do not need to
reflectively judge that a building has been destroyed, but directly
see it in terms of that which it is
not
—the building,
say, in its former glory before being wrecked by the storm. Humans
introduce the possibility of destruction and fragility into the world,
since objectively there is just a change. Sartre’s basic
question is: how could we accomplish this unless we are a being by
whom nothingness comes into the world, i.e., free? He poses similar
arguments in regard to a range of phenomena that present as basic to
our modes of inhabiting the world, from bad faith through to anguish.
In all of these cases Sartre argues that while we can expressly pose
negative judgements, or deliberately ask questions that admit of the
possibility of negative reply, or consciously individuate and
distinguish objects by reference to the objects which they are not,
there is a pre-comprehension of non-being that is the condition of
such negative judgements.
Although the for-itself and the in-itself are initially defined very
abstractly, the book ultimately comes to say a lot more about the
for-itself, even if not much more about the in-itself. The picture of
the for-itself and its freedom gradually becomes more
“concrete”, reflecting the architectonic of the text,
which has more sustained treatments of the body, others, and action,
in the second half. Throughout, Sartre gives a series of paradoxical
glosses on the nature of the for-itself—i.e., a “being
which is what it is not and is not what it is” (Sartre 1943
[1956: 79]). Although this might appear to be a contradiction,
Sartre’s claim is that it is the fundamental mode of existence
of the for-itself that is future-oriented and does not have a stable
identity in the manner of a chair, say, or a pen-knife. Rather,
“existence precedes essence”, as he famously remarks in
both
Being and Nothingness
and
Existentialism is a
Humanism
.
In later chapters he develops the basic ontological position in regard
to free action. His point is not, of course, to say we are free to do
or achieve anything (freedom as power), or even to claim that we are
free to “project” anything at all. The for-itself is
always in a factical situation. Nonetheless, he asserts that the
combination of the motives and ends we aspire to in relation to that
facticity depend on an act of negation in relation to the given. As he
puts it: “Action necessarily implies as its condition the
recognition of a “desideratum”; that is, of an objective
lack or again of a negatité” (Sartre 1943 [1956: 433]).
Even suffering in-itself is not a sufficient motive to determine
particular acts. Rather, it is the apprehension of the revolution as
possible (and as desired) which gives to the worker’s suffering
its value as motive (Sartre 1943 [1956: 437]). A factual state, even
poverty, does not determine consciousness to apprehend it as a lack.
No factual state, whatever it may be, can cause consciousness to
respond to it in any one way. Rather, we make a choice (usually
pre-reflective) about the significance of that factual state for us,
and the ends and motives that we adopt in relation to it. We are
“condemned” to freedom of this ontological sort, with
resulting anguish and responsibility for our individual situation, as
well as for more collective situations of racism, oppression, and
colonialism. These are the themes for which Sartre became famous,
especially after World War 2 and
Existentialism is a
Humanism
.
In
Being and Nothingness
he provides various examples that
are designed to make this quite radical philosophy of freedom
plausible, including the hiker who gives in to their fatigue and
collapses to the ground. Sartre says that a necessary condition for
the hiker to give in to their fatigue—short of fainting—is
that their fatigue goes from being experienced as simply part of the
background to their activity, with their direct conscious attention
focusing on something else (e.g., the scenery, the challenge,
competing with a friend, philosophising, etc.), to being the direct
focus of their attention and thus becoming a motive for direct
recognition of one’s exhaustion and the potential action of
collapsing to the ground. Although we are not necessarily reflectively
aware of having made such a decision, things could have been otherwise
and thus Sartre contends we have made a choice. Despite appearances,
however, Sartre insists that his view is not a voluntarist or
capricious account of freedom, but one that necessarily involves a
situation and a context. His account of situated freedom in the
chapter “Freedom and Action” affirms the inability to
extricate intentions, ends, motives, and reasons, from the embodied
context of the actor. As a synthetic whole, it is not merely freedom
of intention or motive (and hence even consciousness) that Sartre
affirms. Rather, our freedom is realised only in its projections and
actions, and is nothing without such action.
4.2 Bad faith and the critique of Freudian psychoanalysis
Sartre’s account of bad faith (
mauvaise foi
) is of
major interest. It is said to be a phenomenon distinctive of the
for-itself, thus warranting ontological treatment. It also feeds into
questions to do with self-knowledge (see Moran 2001), as well as
serving as the basis for some of his criticisms of racism and
colonialism in his later work. His account of bad faith juxtaposes a
critique of Freud with its own “depth” interpretive
account, “existential psychoanalysis”, which is itself
indebted to Freud, as Sartre admits.
We will start with Sartre’s critique of Freud, which is both
simple and complex, and features in the early parts of the chapter on
bad faith in
Being and Nothingness
. In short, Freud’s
differing meta-psychological pictures (Conscious, Preconscious,
Unconscious, or Id, Ego, Superego) are charged with splitting the
subject in two (or more) in attempting to provide a mechanistic
explanation of bad faith: that is, how there can be a
“liar” and a “lied to” duality within a single
consciousness. But Sartre accuses Freud of reifying this structure,
and rather than adequately explaining the problem of bad faith, he
argues that Freud simply transfers the problem to another level where
it remains unsolved, thus consisting in a pseudo-explanation (which
today might be called a “homuncular fallacy”). Rather than
the problem being something that pertains to an embodied subject, and
how they might both be aware of something and yet also repress it at
the same time, Sartre argues that the early Freudian
meta-psychological model transfers the seat of this paradox to the
censor: that is, to a functional part of the brain/mind that both
knows and does not know. It must know enough in order to efficiently
repress, but it also must not know too much or nothing is hidden and
the problematic truth is manifest directly to consciousness.
Freud’s “explanation” is hence accused of
recapitulating the problem of bad faith in an ostensible mechanism
that is itself “conscious” in some paradoxical sense.
Sartre even provocatively suggests that the practice of psychoanalysis
is itself in bad faith, since it treats a part of ourselves as
“Id”-like and thereby denies responsibility for it. That
is not the end of Sartre’s story, however, because he ultimately
wants to revive a version of psychoanalysis that does not pivot around
the “unconscious” and these compartmentalised models of
the mind. We will come back to that, but it is first necessary to
introduce Sartre’s own positive account of bad faith.
While bad faith is inevitable in Sartre’s view, it is also
important to recognise that the “germ of its destruction”
lies within. This is because bad faith always remains at least partly
available to us in our own lived-experience, albeit not in a manner
that might be given propositional form in the same way as knowledge of
an external object. In short, when I existentially comprehend that my
life is dissatisfying, or even reflect on this basis that I have lived
an inauthentic life, while I am grasping something about myself (it is
given differently to the recognition that others have lived a lie and
more likely to induce anxiety), I am nonetheless not strictly
equivalent or identical with the “I” that is claimed to be
in bad faith (cf. Moran 2001). There is a distanciation involved in
coming to this recognition and the potential for self-transformation
of a more practical kind, even if this is under-thematised in
Being and Nothingness
.
Sartre gives many examples of bad faith that remain of interest. His
most famous example of bad faith is the café waiter who plays
at being a café waiter, and who attempts to institutionalise
themselves as this object. While Sartre’s implied criticisms of
their manner of inhabiting the world might seem to disparage social
roles and affirm an individualism, arguably this is not a fair reading
of the details of the text. For Sartre we do have a factical
situation, but the claim is that we cannot be wholly reduced to it. As
Sartre puts it:
There is no doubt I am in a sense a café waiter—otherwise
could I not just as well call myself a diplomat or reporter? But if I
am one, this cannot be in the mode of being-in-itself. I am a waiter
in the mode of
being what I am not
. (Sartre 1943 [1956: 60])
In subsequent work, racism becomes emblematic of bad faith, when we
reduce the other to some ostensible identity (e.g.,
Anti-semite
and the Jew
).
It is important to recognise that no project of
“sincerity”, if that is understood as strictly being what
one is, is possible for Sartre given his view of the for-itself.
Likewise, in regard to any substantive self-knowledge that might be
achieved through direct self-consciousness, our options are limited.
On Sartre’s view we cannot look inwards and discover the truth
about our identity or our own bad faith through simple introspection
(there is literally no-thing to observe). Moreover, when we have a
lived experience, and then reflect on ourselves from outside (e.g.,
third-personally), we are not strictly reducible to that Ego that is
so posited. We transcend it. Or, to be more precise, we both are that
Ego (just as we are what the Other perceives) and yet are also not
reducible to it. This is due to the structure of consciousness and the
arguments from
Transcendence of the Ego
examined in
section 2
.
 In
Being and Nothingness
, the temporal aspects of this
non-coincidence are also emphasised. We are not just our past and our
objective attributes in accord with some sort of principle of
identity, because we are also our “projects”, and these
are intrinsically future oriented.
Nonetheless, Sartre argues that it would be false to conclude that all
modes of inhabiting the world are thereby equivalent in terms of
“faith” and “bad faith”. Rather, there are
what he calls “patterns of bad faith” and he says these
are “objective”. Any conduct can be seen from two
perspectives—transcendence and facticity, being-for-itself and
being-for-others. But it is the exclusive affirmation of one or the
others of these (or a motivated and selective oscillation between
them) which constitutes bad faith. There is no direct account of good
faith in
Being and Nothingness
, other than the enigmatic
footnote at the end of the book that promises an ethics. There are
more sustained treatments of authenticity in his
Notebooks for an
Ethics
and in
Anti-semite and Jew
(see also the entry on
authenticity
).
4.3 The Look, shame and intersubjectivity
Sartre’s work on inter-subjectivity is often the subject of
premature dismissal. The hyperbolic dimension of his writings on the
Look of the Other and the pessimism of his chapter on “concrete
relations with others”, which is essentially a restatement of
the “master-slave” stage of Hegel’s struggle for
recognition without the possibility of its overcoming, are sometimes
treated as if they were nothing but the product of a certain sort of
mind—a kind of adolescent paranoia or hysteria about the Other
(see, e.g., Marcuse 1948). What this has meant, however, is that the
significance of Sartre’s work on inter-subjectivity, both within
phenomenological circles and more broadly in regard to philosophy of
mind and social cognition, has been downplayed. Building on the
insights of Hegel, Husserl and Heidegger, Sartre proposes a set of
necessary and sufficient conditions for any theory of the other, which
are far from trivial. In
Being and Nothingness
, Sartre
suggests that various philosophical positions—realism and
idealism, and beyond—have been shipwrecked, often unawares, on
what he calls the “reef of solipsism”. His own solution to
the problem of other minds consists, first and foremost, in his
descriptions of being subject to the look of another, and the way in
which in such an experience we become a “transcendence
transcended”. On his famous description, we are asked to imagine
that we are peeping through a keyhole, pre-reflectively immersed and
absorbed in the scene on the other side of the door. Maybe we would be
nervous engaging in such activities given the socio-cultural
associations of being a “Peeping Tom”, but after a period
of time we would be given over to the scene with self-reflection and
self-awareness limited to merely the minimal (tacit or
“non-thetic” in Sartre’s language) understanding
that we are not what we are perceiving. Suddenly, though, we hear
footsteps, and we have an involuntary apprehension of ourselves as an
object in the eyes of another; a “pre-moral” experience of
shame; a shudder of recognition that we are the object that the other
sees, without room for any sort of inferential theorising or cognising
(at least that is manifest to our own consciousness). This ontological
shift, Sartre says, has another person as its condition,
notwithstanding whether or not one is in error on a particular
occasion of such an experience (i.e., the floor creaks but there is
no-one actually literally present). While many other phenomenological
accounts emphasise empathy or direct perception of mental states (for
example, Scheler and Merleau-Ponty), Sartre thereby adds something
significant and distinctive to these accounts that focus on our
experience of the other person as an object (albeit of a special kind)
rather than as a subject. In common with other phenomenologists like
Merleau-Ponty and Scheler, Sartre also maintains that it is a mistake
to view our relations with the other as one characterised by a radical
separation that we can only bridge with inferential reasoning. Any
argument by analogy, either to establish the existence of others in
general or to particular mental states like anger, is problematic,
begging the question and having insufficient warrant.
For Sartre, at least in his early work, our experience of being what
he calls a “we subject”—as a co-spectator in a
lecture or concert for example, which involves no objectification of
the other people we are with—is said to be merely a subjective
and psychological phenomenon that does not ground our understanding
and knowledge of others ontologically (Sartre 1943 [1956:
413–5]). Originally, human relations are typified by dyadic mode
of conflict best captured in the look of the other, and the sort of
scenario concerning the key-hole we just considered above. Given that
we also do not grasp a plural look, for Sartre, this means that social
life is fundamentally an attempt to control the impact of the look
upon us, either by anticipating it in advance and attempting to
invalidate that perspective (sadism) or by anticipating it and
attempting to embrace that solicited perspective when it comes
(masochism). In Sartre’s words:
It is useless for human reality to seek to escape this dilemma: one
must either transcend the Other or allow oneself to be transcended by
him. The essence of the relations between consciousness is not the
Mitsein
(being-with); it is conflict. (Sartre 1943 [1956:
429])
5. Existential Psychoanalysis and the Fundamental Project
Sartre’s radical criticism of Freud’s theory of the
unconscious is not his last word on psychoanalysis. In the last
chapters of
Being and Nothingness
, Sartre presents his own
conception of an existential psychoanalysis, drawing on some insights
from his attempt to account for Emperor Wilhelm II as a
“human-reality” in the 14
th
notebook from his
War Diaries
(Sartre 1983b [1984]). This existential version
of psychoanalysis is claimed to be compatible with Sartre’s
rejection of the unconscious, and is expected to achieve a
“psychoanalysis of consciousness” (Moati 2020: 219),
allowing us to understand one’s existence in light of their
fundamental free choice of themselves.
The very idea of a psychoanalysis oriented towards the study of
consciousness rather than the unconscious seems paradoxical—a
paradox increased by Sartre’s efforts to highlight the
fundamental differences that oppose his own version of psychoanalysis
to Freud’s. Sartre contends that Freud’s
“empirical” psychoanalysis
is based on the hypothesis of the existence of an unconscious psyche,
which on principle escapes the intuition of the subject.
By contrast, Sartre’s own existential psychoanalysis aims to
remain faithful to one of the earliest claims of Husserl’s
phenomenology: that all psychic acts are “coextensive with
consciousness” (Sartre 1943 [1956: 570]). For Sartre, however,
the basic motivation for rejecting Freud’s hypothesis is less an
inheritance of Brentano’s descriptive psychology (as was the
case for Husserl) than a consequence of Sartre’s fundamental
critique of determinism, applied to the naturalist presuppositions of
empirical psychoanalysis and the particular kind of determinism that
it involves. In agreement with Freud, Sartre holds that psychic life
remains inevitably “opaque” and at least somewhat
impenetrable to us. He also stresses that the philosophical
understanding of human reality requires a method for investigating the
meaning
of psychic facts. But Sartre denies that the methods
and causal laws of the natural sciences are of any help in that
respect. The human
psyche
cannot be fully analysed and
explained as a mere
result
of external constraints acting
like physical forces or natural causes. The for-itself, being always
what it is not and not what it is, remains free whatever the external
and social constraints. Sartre is consequently bound to reject any
emphasis on the causal impact of the past upon the present, which he
argues is the basic methodological framework of empirical
psychoanalysis. That does not mean that past psychic or physical facts
have no impact on one’s existence whatsoever. Rather, Sartre
contends that the impact of past events is determined in relation to
one’s present choice, and understood as the consequence of the
power invested in this free choice. As he puts it:
Since the force of compulsion in my past is borrowed from my free,
reflecting choice and from the very power which this choice has given
itself, it is impossible to determine a priori the compelling power of
a past. (Sartre 1943 [1956: 503])
Past events bear no other meaning than the one given by a subject, in
agreement with the free project that orients his or her existence
towards the future. Conversely, determinist explanations that construe
one’s present as a mere consequence of the past proceed from a
kind of self-delusion that operates by concealing one’s free
project, and thus contributes to the obliteration of responsibility.
Sartre hence seeks to redefine the scope of psychoanalysis: rather
than a proper explanation of human behaviour that relies on the
identification of the laws of its causation, psychoanalysis consists
in understanding the meaning of our conducts in light of one’s
project of existence and free choice. One might wonder, then, why we
need any such psychoanalysis, if the existential project that
constitutes its object is freely chosen by the subject. Sartre
addresses this objection in
Being and Nothingness
, claiming
that
if the fundamental project is fully experienced by the subject and
hence wholly conscious, that certainly does not mean that it must by
the same token be known by him; quite the contrary. (Sartre 1943
[1956: 570])
What Freud calls the unconscious must be redescribed as the
paradoxical entanglement of a “total absence of knowledge”
combined with a “true understanding” (
réelle
comprehension
) of oneself (1972,
Sit. IX
: 111). The
legitimacy of Sartre’s existential psychoanalysis of
consciousness lies in its ability to unveil the original project
according to which one chooses (more or less obscurely) to develop the
fundamental orientations of their existence. According to Sartre,
analysing a human subject and understanding the meaning that orients
their existence as a whole requires that we grasp the specific kind of
unity that lies behind their various attitudes and conducts. This
unity can only appear once we discover the synthetic principle of
unification or “totalization” (
totalisation
) that
commands the whole of their behaviours. Sartre understands this
totalization as an an-going process that covers the entire course of
one’s existence, a process which is constantly reassumed so as
to integrate the new developments of this existence. For this reason,
this never ending process of totalization cannot be fully
self-conscious or the object of reflective self-knowledge. The
synthetic principle that makes this totalization possible is
identified by Sartre in terms of fundamental choice: existential
psychoanalysis describes human subjects as synthetic totalities in
which every attitude, conduct, or behaviour finds its meaning in
relation to the unity of a primary choice, which all of the
subject’s behaviour expresses in its own way.
All human behaviour can thus be described as a secondary
particularisation of a fundamental project which expresses the
subject’s free choice, and conditions the intelligibility of
their actions. On the basis of his diagnosis of Baudelaire’s
existential project, for instance, Sartre goes as far as to claim that
he is “prepared to wager that he preferred meats cooked in
sauces to grills, preserves to fresh vegetables” (Sartre 1947a
[1967: 113]). Sartre legitimates such a daring statement by showing
its logical connection to Baudelaire’s irresistible hatred for
nature, from which his gastronomic preferences must derive, and which
Sartre identifies as the expression of the initial free choice of
himself that commands the whole of the French
poète
maudit
’s existence. In Sartre’s words:
He chose to exist for himself as he was for others. He wanted his
freedom to appear to himself like a “nature”; and he
wanted this “nature” which others discovered in him to
appear to them like the very emanation of his freedom. From that point
everything becomes clear. […] We should look in vain for a
single circumstance for which he was not fully and consciously
responsible. Every event was a reflection of that indecomposable
totality which he was from the first to the last day of his life
(Sartre 1947a [1967: 191–192]).
Baudelaire’s choice of himself both accounts for the
subject’s freedom (insofar as it has been freely accepted as the
subject’s own project of existence) and exerts a constraint on
particular behaviours and attitudes towards the world, so that he is
bound to act and behave in a way that must be compatible with that
choice. Although absolutely free, such an initial choice takes the
shape and the meaning of an inescapable and relentless
destiny
—a destiny in which one’s sense of freedom
and their inability to act in any other way than they actually did
come to merge perfectly: “the free choice which a man makes of
himself is completely identified with what is called his
destiny” (Sartre 1947a [1967: 192]).
In the years following the publication of
Being and
Nothingness
, Sartre refines this original conception of
existential psychoanalysis. He applies it methodically to the
biographical analysis of a series of major French writers (Baudelaire
first, then Mallarmé, Jean Genêt, Flaubert, and himself
in
Words
), warning against the dangers of all kinds of
determinist interpretations, from the constitution of psychological
types to materialist explanations inherited from Marxian historical
analyses. Sartre’s analyses become more subtle over time, as he
substitutes fine-grained descriptions of the concrete constraints that
frame and shape the limits of human lives to the strongly metaphysical
theses on freedom that he was first tempted to apply indistinctly to
each of these writers. Accordingly, existential psychoanalysis plays a
central role in the development of Sartre’s thought from the
early 40s up to his last published work on Flaubert. It allows him to
unify and articulate two fundamental threads of his philosophical
thinking: his ontological analysis of the absolute freedom of the
for-itself in
Being and Nothingness
; and his later attempt to
take into consideration the social, historical and political factors
that are inevitably involved in the determination of one’s free
choice of their own existence. Already in his
War Diaries
from 1940, the method of analysis of “human reality”
arises from Sartre’s attempt to
understand
rather than
explain (according to Dilthey’s famous distinction) Emperor
Wilhelm II’s historical situation and its relation to the
aspects of his personal life that express his specific way of
being-in-the-world (Sartre 1983b [1984: 308–309]). The
application of his method to the specific cases of these French
writers allowed him to refine the ahistorical descriptions of his
earlier work, by bringing the analysis of the subject’s freedom
back to the material/historical conditions (both internal and
external) of constitution of their particular modes of existing.
Sartre’s inquiries into existential psychoanalysis also
anticipate and intersect with his philosophical investigations on
historical anthropology. The progressive-regressive method presented
in
Search for a Method
and
Critique of Dialectical
Reason
(Sartre 1960a [1976]) was first sketched and experimented
through Sartre’s essays in existential psychoanalysis.
Sartre’s detailed analyses of Flaubert’s biography in
The Family Idiot
can be read as synthesising the
hermeneutical methodology theorised in
Search for A Method
and the conception of the freedom involved in one’s initial
choice of themselves that arose from
Being and Nothingness
.
Moving discretely away from an all-too metaphysical doctrine of
absolute freedom, Sartre goes back to the most concrete details of
Flaubert’s material conditions of existence in order to account
for the specific way in which Flaubert made himself able, through the
writing of his novels, to overcome his painful situation as a
“frustrated and jealous younger brother” and
“unloved child” thanks to a totalizing project that made
him “the author of
Madame Bovary
” (Sartre
1971–72 [1987, vol. 2: 7]). If Flaubert’s novel and
masterpiece is consequently understood and described as the final
objectivation of Gustave’s fundamental project, Sartre is now
careful to point out the economic, historic and social conditions
within which this project only finds its full intelligibility.
Sartre’s psychoanalytic method is then expected to reveal,
beyond what society has made of Flaubert, what he himself could make
of what society has made of him. In order to fly away from the painful
reality of his unbearable familial situation, the young Gustave
chooses irreality over reality, and chooses it freely, though
achingly. From that moment on, his dedication to literature commits
him to a fictional world that he couldn’t but choose to elect as
the realm of his genius.
6. Existentialist Marxism: Critique of Dialectical Reason
While
Search for a Method
(1957) had been published earlier,
it is not until 1960 that Sartre completed the first
volume—“Theory of Practical Ensembles”—of what
is his final systematic work of philosophy,
Critique of
Dialectical Reason
. The second volume, “The Intelligibility
of History”, was published posthumously in French in 1985. It
would be 1991 before both volumes were to be available in English,
which goes some of the way towards explaining their subsequent
neglect. It is also a book that rivals
Being and Nothingness
for difficulty, even if some of its goals and ambitions can be
expressed straightforwardly enough. Never a member of the French
Communist Party, Sartre nonetheless begins by laying his Marxist cards
on the table:
we were convinced at one and the same time that historical materialism
furnished the only valid interpretation of history and that
existentialism remained the only concrete approach to reality. (Sartre
1957 [1963: 21])
Critique
offers a systematic attempt to justify these two
perspectives and render them compatible. In broad terms, some of the
main steps needed to effect such a synthesis are clear, most notably
to deny or limit strong structuralist and determinist versions of
Marxism. Borrowing some themes from Merleau-Ponty’s
Humanism
and Terror
, Sartre maintained that any genuinely dialectical
method refuses to reduce; it refuses scientific and economic
determinism that treats humans as things, contrary to reductive
versions of Marxism. He pithily puts his objection to such
explanations in terms of what we might today call the genetic fallacy.
Sartre says,
Valery is a petit bourgeois intellectual, no doubt about it. But not
every petit bourgeois intellectual is Valery. The heuristic inadequacy
of contemporary Marxism is contained in these two sentences. (Sartre
1957 [1963: 56])
Moreover, for Sartre, class struggle is not the only factor that
determines and orients history and the field of possibilities. There
is human choice and commitment in class formation that is equally
fundamental. The way in which this plays out in
Critique
is
through an emphasis on praxis rather than consciousness, which we have
seen is also characteristic of his existential psychoanalytic work of
the prior decade.
Without being able to adequately summarise the vast
Critique
here (see Flynn 1984), one of the book’s core conceptual
innovations is the idea of the practico-inert. Sartre defines this as
“the activity of others insofar as it is sustained and diverted
by inorganic inertia” (Sartre 1960a [1976: 556]). The concept is
intended to capture the forms of social and historical sedimentation
that had only minimally featured in
Being and Nothingness
. It
is the reign of necessity,
the domain … in which inorganic materiality envelops human
multiplicity and transforms the producer into its product. (Sartre
1960a [1976: 339])
For Sartre, the practico-inert is the negation of humanity. Any
reaffirmation of humanity, in which genuine freedom resides, must take
the form of the negation of this negation (negation is productive
here, as it also was in
Being and Nothingness
). For Sartre,
then, there are two fundamental kinds of social reality: a positive
one in which an active group constitutes the common field; and a
negative one in which individuals are effectively separated from each
other (even though they appear united) in a practico-inert field. In
the practico-inert field, relations are typified by what Sartre calls
seriality, like a number, or a worker in a factory who is allocated to
a place within a given system that is indifferent to the individual.
Sartre’s prime example of this is of waiting for a bus, or
street-car, on the way to work. If the people involved do not know
each other reasonably well there is likely to be a kind of anonymity
to such experiences in which individuals are substitutable for each
other in relation to this imminent bus, and their relations are
organised around functional need. If the bus is late, or if there are
too many people on it, however, those who are waiting go from being
indifferent and anonymous (something akin to what Heidegger calls
das Man
in
Being and Time
) to becoming competitors
and rivals. In a related spirit Sartre also discusses the serial unity
of the TV watching public, of the popular music charts, bourgeois
property, and petty racism and stereotyping as well. These collective
objects keep serial individuals apart from one another under the
pretext of unifying them. Sartre thus appears to accept a version of
the Marxian theses concerning commodity fetishism. This competitive or
antagonistic dimension of the practico-inert is amplified in
situations of material scarcity. This kind of seriality is argued to
be the basic type of sociality, thus transforming the focus on dyadic
consciousnesses of
Being and Nothingness
. In the
Critique
, otherness becomes produced not simply through the
look that Sartre had previously described as the original meaning of
being-for-others, but through the sedimentation of social processes
and through practico-inert mediation. Society produces in us serial
behaviour, serial feelings, serial thoughts, and “passive
activity” (Sartre 1960a [1976: 266]), where events and history
are conceived as external occurrences that befall us, and we feel
compelled by the force of circumstance, or “monstrous
forces” as Sartre puts it. It is the practico-inert, modified by
material and economic scarcity, which turns us into conflictual
competitors and alienates us from each other and ourselves. Only an
end to both material scarcity and the alienating mediation of the
practico-inert will allow for the actualisation of socialism.
While Sartre is pessimistic about the prospects for any sort of
permanent revolution of society, he maintains that we get a fleeting
glimpse of this unalienated condition in the experience of the
“group in fusion”. This occurs when the members of a group
relate to each other through praxis and in a particular way. The group
in fusion is not a collective
à la
the practico-inert,
but a social whole that spontaneously forms as a plurality of serial
individuals respond to some danger, pressing situation, or to the
likelihood of a collective reaction to their stance (Flynn 1984: 114).
We could consider what happens when an individual acts so as to make
manifest this serial otherness, like Rosa Parkes when she refused to
give up her seat and thus drew attention to the specific nature of the
colonialist seriality at the heart of many states in the USA. This
sometimes creates a rupture and others might follow. Sartre’s
own prime example is of a crowd of workers who were fleeing during the
French Revolution in 1789. At some point the workers stopped fleeing,
turned around and reversed direction, suddenly energised alongside
each other by their practical awareness that they were doing something
together. For this kind of “fusion” to happen it must
fulfil the following four key conditions for genuine reciprocity that
Flynn summarises as follows:
That the other be a means to the exact degree that I am a means
myself, i.e., that he be the means towards a transcendent goal and not
my means;
That I recognize the other as praxis at the same time as I
integrate him into my totalizing project;
That I recognize his movement towards his own ends in the very
movement by which I project myself towards mine;
That I discover myself as an object and instrument of his own ends
by the same act that makes him an object and instrument of mine.
(Flynn 1984: 115, also see previous version of this entry [Flynn 2004
[2013]] and cf. Sartre 1960a [1976: 112–3]).
Sartre calls the resurrection of this freedom an
“apocalypse”, indicating that it is an unforeseen and
(potentially) revolutionary event that happens when serial abuse and
exploitation can no longer be tolerated. The group in fusion has a
maximum of praxis and a minimum of inertia, but serial sociality has
the reverse.
Unfortunately, Sartre insists that this group in fusion is destined to
meet with what he calls an “ontological check” in the form
of the institution, which cannot be escaped as some versions of
anarchism and Marxism might hope. The group relapses into seriality
when groups are formalised into hierarchical institutional structures.
Serial otherness comes to implicate itself in interpersonal relations
in at least three ways in the institution: sovereignty; authority; and
bureaucracy (see Book 2, Chapter 6, “The Institution”).
From the co-sovereignty of the group in fusion, someone inevitably
becomes sovereign in any new social order. Similarly, a
command-obedience relation comes about in institutions, to greater and
lesser extents, and there will be exhortations to company loyalty, to
do one’s duty, etc. (Flynn 1984: 120). Bureaucratic rules and
regulation also inevitably follow, partly as a reaction to fear of
sovereignty, and this installs what Sartre calls vertical
otherness—top-down hierarchies, as opposed to the horizontal and
immanent organisation of the group in fusion (Sartre 1960a [1976:
655–663]). As such, the revolutionary force of the group in
fusion is necessarily subject to mediation by the practico-inert, as
well as the problems associated with institutionality just described.
Although is it still structured through a series of oppositions, the
Critique
delivers a sophisticated social ontology that both
addresses some weaknesses in Sartre’s earlier work and unifies
the social and political reflections of much of his later work.
7. Politics and Anti-Colonialism
Although it is not possible to address all of Sartre’s rich and
varied contributions to ethics and politics here, we will introduce
some of the key ideas about race and anti-colonialism that were
important themes in his post
Being and Nothingness
work and
are currently significant issues in our times. Sartre was generally
stridently anti-colonialist, perhaps even advocating a
multiculturalism
avant la lettre
, as Michael Walzer has
argued in his Preface to
Anti-semite and Jew
(Walzer 1995:
xiv). His books and more journalistic writings typically call out what
he saw as the bad faith of many French and European citizens.
The issue of race was part of Sartre’s French intellectual
scene, and Sartre himself played a major role in facilitating that in
the pages of
Les Temps Modernes
,
L’Express
,
and elsewhere. Debates about the intersection of philosophy and race,
and colonialism and multiculturalism, were all being had. These
concerned not only the French Algerian and African
“colonies” but also Vietnam via Tran Duc Thao, who had
challenged Sartre’s efforts to bring phenomenological
existentialism together with Marxism. Initially at least,
Sartre’s arguments here typically drew on and extended some of
the categories deployed in
Being and Nothingness
. There is an
obvious sense in which a critique of racism automatically ensues from
Sartrean existentialism. Racism is a form of bad faith, for Sartre,
since it typically (perhaps necessarily) involves believing in
essences or types, and indeed constructing essences and types. His
Notebooks
suggest that all oppression rests on bad faith. In
racism, in particular, there is an “infernal circle of
irresponsible responsibility, of culpable ignorance and ignorance
which is knowledge” (Sartre 1943 [1956: 49]),
as well as what Sartre calls
passive complicity. Many of us (or Sartre’s own French society)
may not obviously be bigots, but we sustain a system that is
objectively unjust through our choices and sometimes wilful ignorance.
In relation to colonialism, Sartre likewise contends that we have all
profited from colonialist exploitation and sustained its systems, even
if we are not ourselves a “settler”.
This is also the key argument of
Anti-semite and the Jew
,
composed very quickly in 1944 and without much detailed knowledge of
Judaism but with more direct knowledge of the sort of passive
anti-semitism of many French citizens. The text was written following
the Dreyfus affair and before all of the horrors of the holocaust were
widely known. Sartre was aiming to understand (and critique) the
situation he observed around him, in which the imminent return of the
French Jews exiled by the Nazis was not unambiguously welcomed by all.
The book is perceptive about its prime targets, the explicit or
implicit anti-semite, who defines the real Frenchmen by excluding
others, notably the Jew. Now, of course, few of his contemporaries
would admit to being anti-semites, just as few would admit to being
racist. But there are patterns of bad faith that Sartre thinks are
clear: we participate in social systems that force the dilemma of
authenticity or inauthenticity upon the Jew, asking them to choose
between their concrete practical identities (religious and cultural)
and more universal ascriptions (liberty, etc.) in a way that cannot be
readily navigated within the terms of the debate. Sartre consistently
ascribes responsibility to collectives here, even if those collectives
are ultimately sustained by individual decisions and choices. For him,
it is not just the assassin say, nor just Eichmann and the Nazi
regime, who are held responsible. Rather, these more obviously
egregious activities were sustained by their society and the
individuals in it, through culpable ignorance and patterns of bad
faith.
Sartre also addressed the negritude movement in his Preface to
Black Orpheus
(1948), an anthology of negritude poetry. He
called for an anti-racist racism and saw himself as resolutely on the
side of the negritude movement, but he also envisaged such
interventions as a step towards ultimately revealing the category of
race itself as an example of bad faith. Here the reception from Frantz
Fanon and others was mixed. In
Black Skin, White Masks
(1952), Fanon argues this effectively undermined his own
lived-experience and its power (see entries on
negritude
and
Fanon
;
 cf. also Gordon 1995). Sartre continued to address colonialism and
racism in subsequent work, effecting a rapprochement of sorts with
Fanon that culminated in his “Introduction” to
Fanon’s
The Wretched of the Earth
(1961), where also
Sartre appears to endorse a counter-violence.
Although we have not given much attention to Sartre’s literary
and artistic productions since
section 3
above, he continued to produce artistic work of political
significance throughout his career. Continuous with insights from his
What is Literature?
, Sartre argues that in a society that
remains unjust and dominated by oppression, the prose-writer (if not
the poet) must combat this violence by jolting the reader and audience
from their complacency, rather than simply be concerned with art for
its own sake. His literary works hence are typically both
philosophical and political. Although the number of these works
diminished over time, there is still a powerful literary exploration
of the philosophical and political themes of the
Critique
in
the play,
The Condemned of Altona
(1960).
We cannot neatly sum up a public intellectual and man of letters, like
Sartre, to conclude. We do think, however, that it is arguable, with
the benefit of hindsight, that some of Sartre’s interventions
are prescient rather than outmoded remnants of the nineteenth century
(
à la
Foucault). They certainly presage issues that
are in the foreground today, concerning class, race, and gender. That
doesn’t mean that Sartre got it all correct, of course, whatever
that might mean in regard to the complex realities of socio-political
life. Indeed, if one is to take a stand on so many of the major
socio-political issues of one’s time, as Sartre did, it is
inevitable that history will not look kindly on them all.
Sartre’s life and writings hence present a complex and difficult
interpretive task, but they remain a powerful provocation for thought
and action today.
Bibliography
This bibliography presents a selection of the works from Sartre and
secondary literature that are relevant for this article. For a
complete annotated bibliography of Sartre’s works see
Contat, Michel and Michel Rybalka, 1974,
The Writings of
Jean-Paul Sartre
, two volumes, Richard C. McCleary (trans.),
(Northwestern University Studies in Phenomenology & Existential
Philosophy), Evanston, IL: Northwestern University Press.
Updated in
1975,
Magazine littéraire
, 103–4:
9–49,
and by Michel Sicard in
1979, special issue on Sartre,
Obliques
,
18–19(May): 331–347.
Michel Rybalka and Michel Contat have complied an additional
bibliography of primary and secondary sources published since
Sartre’s death in
Rybalka, Michel and Michel Contat, 1993,
Sartre: Bibliographie
1980–1992
, (CNRS Philosophie), Paris: CNRS and
Bowling Green, OH:: Philosophy Documentation Center, Bowling Green
State University.
A. Primary Literature
A.1 Works by Sartre
A.1.1 Individual works published by Sartre
1936a,
La Transcendance de l’ego: Esquisse d’une
description phénomenologique
, Paris: J. Vrin. Translated
as
1957,
The Transcendence of the Ego: An Existentialist Theory
of Consciousness
, Forrest Williams and Robert Kirkpatrick
(trans.), New York: Noonday Press.
2004,
The Transcendence of the Ego: A Sketch for a
Phenomenological Description
, Andrew Brown (trans.), London:
Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780203694367
1936b [2012],
L’imagination
, Paris: F. Alcan.
Translated as
The Imagination
, Kenneth Williford and David
Rudrauf (trans.), London: Routledge, 2012.
doi:10.4324/9780203723692
1938 [1965],
La Nausée: Roman
, Paris: Gallimard.
Translated as
Nausea
, Robert Baldick (trans.), Harmondsworth:
Penguin, 1965.
1939a [1970], “Une idée fondamentale de la
phénoménologie de Husserl:
l’intentionnalit”,
La Nouvelle Revue
française
, 304: 129–132. Reprinted in
Situations
1. Translated as “Intentionality: A
Fundamental Idea of Husserl’s Phenomenology”, Joseph P.
Fell (trans.),
Journal of the British Society for
Phenomenology
, 1(2): 4–5, 1970.
doi:10.1080/00071773.1970.11006118
1939b [1948],
Esquisse d’une théorie des
émotions
, Paris: Hermann. Translated as
The Emotions:
Outline of a Theory
, Bernard Frechtman (trans.), New York:
Philosophical Library, 1948.
1940 [2004],
L’Imaginaire: Psychologie
Phénoménologique de l’imagination
, Paris:
Gallimard. Translated as
The Imaginary: A Phenomenological
Psychology of the Imagination
, Arlette Elkaïm-Sartre (ed.),
Jonathan Webber (trans.), London: Routledge, 2004.
1943 [1956, 2018],
L’être et le néant:
Essai d’ontologie phénoménologique
, Paris:
Gallimard. Translated as
1956,
Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenomenological
Ontology
, Hazel E. Barnes (trans.), New York: Philosophical
Library.
2018,
Being and Nothingness: An Essay in Phenomenological
Ontology
, Sarah Richmond (trans.), London: Routledge.
1945–49,
Les Chemins de la liberté
(The
roads to freedom), Paris: Gallimard. Series of novels
L’âge de raison
(The age of reason, 1945),
Le
sursis
(The reprieve, 1945), and
La mort dans
l’âme
(Troubled sleep, 1949).
1946a [2007],
L’existentialisme est un humanisme
,
(Collection Pensées), Paris: Nagel. Translated as
Existentialism is a Humanism
, John Kulka (ed.), Carol
Macomber (trans.), New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2007.
1946b [1948/1995],
Réflexions sur la question
juive
, Paris: P. Morihien. Translated as
Anti-semite and
Jew
, George J. Becker (trans.), New York: Schocken Books, 1948
(reprinted with preface by Michael Walzer, 1995).
1946c [1955], “Matérialisme et Révolution
I”,
Les Temps Modernes
, 9: 37–63 and 10:
1–32. Reprinted in
Situations III
, Paris: Gallimard,
1949. Translated as , “Materialism and Revolution”, in
Literary and Philosophical Essays
, Annette Michelson
(trans.), New York: Criterion Books, 1955.
1947a [1967],
Baudelaire
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
Baudelaire
, Martin Turnell (trans.), London: H. Hamilton,
1949. Reprinted, Norfolk, CT: New Directions, 1967
1947b [1949],
Huis-Clos
, Paris: Gallimard. First produced
1944. Translated as
No Exit
, in
No Exit, and Three Other
Plays
, New York: Vintage Books, 1949.
1947c [1949],
Les Mouches
, Paris: Gallimard. First
produced 1943. Translated as
The Flies
, in
No Exit, and
Three Other Plays
, New York: Vintage Books, 1949.
1948a [1988], “Qu’est-ce que la
littérature?”,
Les Temps modernes
. Collected in
Situations II
. Translated in
“What Is
Literature?” and Other Essays
, Bernard Frechtman (trans.),
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1988.
1948b [1967], “Conscience de soi et connaissance de
soi”,
Bulletin de la Société française
de Philosophie
, n° 3, avril-juin 1948. Translated as
“Consciousness of Self and Knowledge of Self”, in
Readings in Existential Phenomenology
, Nathaniel Lawrence and
Daniel O’Connor (eds), Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall,
1967.
1948c [1949],
Les mains sales: pièce en sept
tableaux
, Paris: Gallimard. First produced 1948. Translated as
Dirty Hands
, in
No Exit, and Three Other Plays
, New
York: Vintage Books, 1949.
1952a [1963],
Saint-Genêt, Comédien et
martyr
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
Saint Genet: Actor
and Martyr
, Bernard Frechtman (trans.), New York: George
Braziller, 1963.
1952b [1968]. “Les communistes et la paix”, published
in
Situations VI
. Translated as “The Communists and
Peace”, in
The Communists and Peace, with A Reply to Claude
Lefort
, Martha H. Fletcher and Philip R. Berk (trans.), New York:
George Braziller, 1968.
1957 [1963/1968],
Questions de méthode
, Paris:
Gallimard. Later to be a foreword for Sartre 1960. Translated as
Search for a Method
, Hazel E. Barnes (trans.), New York:
Knopf, 1963. Reprinted New York: Random House, 1968.
1960a [1976],
Critique de la Raison dialectique, tome 1,
Théorie des ensembles pratiques
, Paris, Gallimard.
Translated as
Critique of Dialectical Reason, volume 1: Theory of
Practical Ensembles
, Alan Sheridan-Smith (trans.), London: New
Left Books, 1976. Reprinted in 2004 with a forward by Fredric Jameson,
London: Verso. The second unfinished volume was published posthumously
in 1985.
1960b,
Les Séquestrés d’Altona
(The
condemned of Altona), Paris: Gallimard. First produced 1959.
1964a [1964],
Les mots
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
The Words
, Bernard Frechtman (trans.), New York: Braziller,
1964.
1969, “Itinerary of a Thought”, interview with Perry
Anderson, Ronald Fraser and Quintin Hoare,
New Left Review
,
I/58: 43–66. Partially published in
Situations IX
.
1971–72 [1981–93],
L’Idiot de la famille.
Gustave Flaubert de 1821 à 1857
, 3 volumes, Paris:
Gallimard. Translated as
The Family Idiot: Gustave Flaubert,
1821–1857
, 5 volumes, Carol Cosman (trans.), Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1981/1987/1989/1991/1993.
1980 [1996], “L’espoir, maintenant”, interview
with Benny Lévy,
Le Nouvel observateur
, n° 800,
801, 802. Reprinted as
L’espoir maintenant: les entretiens
de 1980
, Lagrasse: Verdier, 1991. Translated as
Hope Now: The
1980 Interviews
, Adrian van den Hoven (trans.), Chicago, IL: The
University of Chicago Press, 1996.
A.1.2 Collections of works by Sartre
References to
Situations
will be abbreviated as
Sit.
followed by the volume, e.g.,
Sit. V
.
1947,
Situations I: Critiques littéraires
, Paris:
Gallimard. Partially translated in
Literary and Philosophical
Essays
, Annette Michelson (trans.), London: Rider, 1955.
Reprinted New York: Collier Books, 1962.
1948,
Situations II
, Paris: Gallimard.
1949,
Situations III: Lendemains de guerre
, Paris:
Gallimard.
1964b,
Situations IV: Portraits
, Paris: Gallimard.
1964c,
Situations V: Colonialisme et
néo-colonialisme
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
Colonialism and Neocolonialism
, Azzdedine Haddour, Steve
Brewer, and Terry McWilliams (trans), London: Routledge, 2001.
doi:10.4324/9780203991848
1964d,
Situations VI: Problèmes du marxisme 1
,
Paris: Gallimard.
1965,
Situations VII: Problèmes du marxisme 2
,
Paris:, Gallimard.
1971,
Situations VIII: Autour de 68
, Paris:
Gallimard.
1972,
Situations IX: Mélanges
, Paris:
Gallimard. Material from
Situations VIII et IX
translated
as
Between Existentialism and Marxism
, John Mathews (trans.),
London: New Left Books, 1974.
1976,
Situations X: Politique et autobiographie
, Paris:
Gallimard. Translated as
Life/Situations: Essays Written and
Spoken
, Paul Auster and Lydia Davis (trans), New York: Pantheon,
1977.
1981,
Œuvres romanesques
, Michel Contat, Michel
Rybalka, G. Idt and G. H. Bauer (eds), Paris: Gallimard,
Bibliothèque de la Pléiade.
1988,
“What is Literature?” and Other Essays
,
[including
Black Orpheus
] tr. Bernard Frechtman et al.,
intro. Steven Ungar, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
2005,
Théâtre complet
, Paris: Gallimard,
Bibliothèque de la Pléiade.
A.1.3 Posthumous works by Sartre
1983a,
Cahiers pour une morale
, Paris: Gallimard.
Translated as
Notebook for an Ethics
, David Pellauer
(trans.), Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press, 1992.
1983b [1984],
Carnets de la drôle de guerre, septembre
1939 - mars 1940
, Paris: Gallimard. Reprinted in 1995 with an
addendum. Translated as
The War Diaries: Notebooks from a Phoney
War
, Quinton Hoare (trans.), New York: Pantheon, 1984.
1983c,
Lettres au Castor et à quelques autres
,
Simone de Beauvoir (ed.), Paris: Gallimard
Tome 1: 1926–1939
Tome 2: 1940–1963
Some translated in
Quiet Moments in a War. The Letters of
Jean-Paul Sartre to Simone de Beauvoir, 1940–1963
, Simone
de Beauvoir (ed.) and Lee Fahnestock and Norman MacAfee (tr. and
intro.), New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1993.
1984,
Le Scenario Freud
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
The Freud Scenario
, Quinton Hoare (trans.), Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1986.
1985,
Critique de la raison dialectique, tome 2,
L’intelligibilité de l’histoire
, Paris:
Gallimard. Translated as
Critique of Dialectical Reason, Volume 2:
The Intelligibility of History
, Quintin Hoare (trans.), London:
Verso, 1991. Reprinted 2006, foreword by Frederic Jameson, London:
Verso. [unfinished].
1989,
Vérité et existence
, Paris: Gallimard
[written in 1948]. Translated as
Truth and Existence
, Adrian
van den Hoven (trans.), Ronald Aronson (intro.), Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1992.
1990,
Écrits de jeunesse
, Michel Contat and Michel
Rybalka (eds), Paris: Gallimard.
A.2 Works by others
Astruc, Alexandre and Michel Contat (directors), 1978,
Sartre
by Himself: A Film Directed by Alexandre Astruc and Michel Contat with
the Participation of Simone de Beauvoir, Jacques-Larent Bost, Andre
Gorz, Jean Pouillon
, transcription of film, Richard Seaver
(trans.), New York: Urizen Books.
Beauvoir, Simone de, 1947 [1976],
Pour une morale de
l’ambiguïté
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
The Ethics of Ambiguity
, Bernard Frechtman (trans.), New
York: Philosophical Library, 1948. Translation reprinted New York:
Citadel Press, 1976.
–––, 1960 [1962],
La force de
l’âge
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
The Prime
of Life
, Peter Green (trans.), Cleveland, OH: World Publishing,
1962.
–––, 1963 [1965],
La force des choses
,
Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
Force of Circumstance
,
Richard Howard (trans.), New York: Putnam, 1965.
–––, 1981 [1986],
La cérémonie
des adieux: suivi de, Entretiens avec Jean-Paul Sartre,
août-septembre 1974
, Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
Adieux: A Farewell to Sartre
, Patrick O’Brian (trans.),
New York: Pantheon Books, 1984. Translation reprinted London and New
York: Penguin, 1988.
Carnap, Rudolf, 1931, “Überwindung der Metaphysik durch
logische Analyse der Sprache”,
Erkenntnis
, 2(1):
219–241. Translated as “The Elimination of Metaphysics
Through Logical Analysis of Language”, Arthur Pap (trans.), in
Logical Positivism
, A. J. Ayer (ed.), New York: The Free
Press, 1959, 60–81. doi:10.1007/BF02028153 (de)
Contat, Michel and Michel Rybalka, 1970,
Les écrits de
Sartre: Chronologie, bibliographie commentée
, Paris:
Gallimard. Translated as
Writings of Jean-Paul Sartre, Volume 1: A
Bibliographical Life
, Richard C. McCleary (trans.), Evanston, IL:
Northwestern University Press, 1974.
Deleuze, Gilles, 2004,
Desert Islands and Other Texts,
1953–1974
, David Lapoujade (trans.), Los Angeles, CA:
Semiotext(e).
Derrida, Jacques, 1992 [1995],
Points de Suspension:
Entretiens
, Elisabeth Weber (ed.), (Collection la philosophie en
effet), Paris: Editions Galilée. Translated as
Points:
Interviews, 1974–1994
, Peggy Kamuf (trans.), (Meridian),
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1995.
Fanon, Francis, 1952,
Peau noire, masques blancs
, Paris,
Seuil. Translated as
Black Skin, White Masks
, Richard Philcox
(trans.), New York: Grove Books, 2008.
–––, 1961,
Les damnés de la
terre
, Paris: Maspero. Translated as
The Wretched of the
Earth
, Richard Philcox (trans.), New York: Grove Books,
2005.
Foucault, Michel, 1966 [1994], “L’homme est-il
mort?” (interview with C. Bonnefoy),
Arts et Loisirs
,
no. 38 (15–21 juin): 8–9. Reprinted in
Dits et
Écrits
, Daniel Defert, François Ewald, &
Jacques Lagrange (eds.), 540–544, Paris: Gallimard, 1994.

2001,
Dits et Écrits
, volume 1,
Paris: Gallimard.
Heidegger, Martin, 1957 [1962],
Sein und Zeit
,
Tübingen: M. Niemeyer. Translated as
Being and Time,
John Macquarrie and Edward Robinson (trans), London: SCM Press.
Husserl, Edmund, 1913 [1983],
Ideen zu einer reinen
Phänomenologie und phänomenologischen Philosophie
,
Halle: Niemeyer. Translated as
Ideas Pertaining to a Pure
Phenomenology and to a Phenomenological Philosophy
, volume 1, F.
Kersten (tr.), The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1983.
–––, 1950 [1960],
Cartesianische
Meditationen eine Einleitung in die Phänomenologie
, The
Hague: Nijhoff. Translated as
Cartesian Meditations: An
Introduction to Phenomenology
, Dorion Cairns (trans.), The Hague:
Nijhoff, 1960.
–––, 1900/1901, 1913/1921 [1970, 2001],
Logische Untersuchungen
, two volumes, Halle: M. Niemeyer.
Second edition 1913/1921. Translated as
Logical
Investigations
, 2 volumes, J. N. Findlay (trans.), London:
Routledge and K. Paul, 1970. Revised English edition, 2 volumes,
London: Routledge, 2001.
Levinas, Emmanuel, 1930 [1963],
La théorie de
l’intuition dans la phénoménologie de
Husserl
, Doctoral dissertation, Université de Strasbourg.
Published Paris: Vrin, 1963.
Marcuse, Herbert, 1948, “Existentialism: Remarks on
Jean-Paul Sartre’s L’Etre et Le Neant”,
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
, 8(3):
309–336. doi:10.2307/2103207
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, 1947 [1969],
Humanisme et terreur:
essai sur le problème communiste
, (Les Essais [2
sér.] 27), Paris: Gallimard. Translated as
Humanism and
Terror: An Essay on the Communist Problem
, John O’Neill
(trans.), Boston: Beacon Press.
Moran, Richard, 2001,
Authority and Estrangement: An Essay on
Self-Knowledge
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
B. Secondary literature
Anderson, Thomas C., 1993,
Sartre’s Two Ethics: From
Authenticity to Integral Humanity
, La Salle, IL: Open Court.
Aronson, Ronald, 1987,
Sartre’s Second Critique
,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Baring, Edward, 2011,
The Young Derrida and French Philosophy,
1945–1968
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511842085
Barnes, Hazel Estella, 1981,
Sartre & Flaubert
,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bell, Linda A., 1989,
Sartre’s Ethics of
Authenticity
, Tuscaloosa, AL: University of Alabama Press.
Busch, Thomas W., 1990,
The Power of Consciousness and the
Force of Circumstances in Sartre’s Philosophy
, Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press.
Cabestan, Philippe, 2004,
L’être et la conscience:
recherches sur la psychologie et
l’ontophénoménologie sartriennes
(Ousia 51),
Bruxelles: Editions Ousia.
Catalano, Joseph S., 1974,
A Commentary on Jean-Paul
Sartre’s “Being and Nothingness”
(Harper
Torchbooks 1807), New York: Harper & Row. New edition Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1980.
–––, 1986,
A Commentary on Jean-Paul
Sartre’s Critique of Dialectical Reason, Volume 1, Theory of
Practical Ensembles
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Churchill, Steven and Jack Reynolds (eds.), 2014,
Jean-Paul
Sartre: Key Concepts
, New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9781315729695
Cohen-Solal, Annie, 1985 [1987],
Sartre
, Paris:
Gallimard. Translated as
Sartre: A Life
, Norman MacAfee
(ed.). Anna Cancogni (trans.), New York: Pantheon Books, 1987.
Coorebyter, Vincent de, 2000,
Sartre face à la
phénoménologie: Autour de
“L’Intentionnalité” et de “La
Transcendance de l’Ego”
(Ousia 40), Bruxelles:
Ousia.
–––, 2005,
Sartre, avant la
phénoménologie: autour de “La nausée”
et de la “Légende de la vérité”
(Ousia 53), Bruxelles: Ousia.
Cox, Gary, 2019,
Existentialism and Excess: The Life and Times
of Jean-Paul Sartre
, London: Bloomsbury.
Detmer, David, 1988,
Freedom as a Value: A Critique of the
Ethical Theory of Jean-Paul Sartre
, La Salle, IL: Open
Court.
Dobson, Andrew, 1993,
Jean-Paul Sartre and the Politics of
Reason: A Theory of History.
, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Fell, Joseph P., 1979,
Heidegger and Sartre: An Essay on Being
and Place
, New York: Columbia University Press.
Flynn, Thomas R., 1984,
Sartre and Marxist Existentialism: The
Test Case of Collective Responsibility
, Chicago, IL: University
of Chicago Press.
–––, 1997,
Sartre, Foucault and Historical
Reason: volume 1, Toward an Existentialist Theory of History
,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
–––, 2004 [2013], “Jean-Paul
Sartre”, in
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2013 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2013/entries/sartre/
>
–––, 2014,
Sartre: A Philosophical
Biography
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gardner, Sebastian, 2009,
Sartre’s “Being and
Nothingness”: A Reader’s Guide
(Continuum
Reader’s Guides), London: Continuum.
Gordon, Lewis R., 1995,
Bad Faith and Antiblack Racism
,
Atlantic Highlands, NJ: Humanities Press.
Henri-Levy, Bernard, 2003,
Sartre: The Philosopher of the
Twentieth Century
, Cambridge: Polity Press.
Howells, Christina (ed.), 1992,
The Cambridge Companion to
Sartre
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CCOL0521381142
Jeanson, Francis, 1947 [1980],
Le problème moral et la
pensée de Sartre
(Collection “Pensée et
civilisation”), Paris: Éditions du myrte. Translated as
Sartre and the Problem of Morality
, Robert V. Stone (trans.),
(Studies in Phenomenology and Existential Philosophy), Bloomington,
IN: Indiana University Press, 1980.
Judaken, Jonathan (ed.), 2008,
Race after Sartre: Antiracism,
Africana Existentialism, Postcolonialism
(Philosophy and Race),
Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
McBride, William Leon, 1991,
Sartre’s Political
Theory
, (Studies in Continental Thought), Bloomington, IN:
Indiana University Press.
–––, (ed.), 1997,
Sartre and
Existentialism
, 8 volumes, New York: Garland.
Existentialist Ontology and Human Consciousness
Sartre’s French Contemporaries and Enduring Influences:
Camus, Merleau-Ponty, Debeauvoir & Enduring Influences
Sartre’s Life, Times and Vision du Monde
Existentialist Literature and Aesthetics
Existentialist Background: Kierkegaard, Dostoevsky, Nietzsche,
Jaspers, Heidegger: Kierkegaard, Dostoevsky, Nietzsche, Jaspers,
Heidegger
Existentialist Ethics: Issues in Existentialist
Ethics
Existentialist Politics and Political Theory
The Development and Meaning of Twentieth-Century
Existentialism
Moati, Raoul, 2019,
Sartre et le mystère en pleine
lumière
(Passages), Paris: Les éditions du
Cerf.
Morris, Katherine J., 2008,
Sartre
, (Blackwell Great
Minds 5), Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Mouillie, Jean-Marc and Jean-Philippe Narboux (eds.), 2015,
Sartre: L’être et le néant: nouvelles
lectures
, Paris: Les Belles Lettres.
Murphy, Julien S. (ed.), 1999,
Feminist Interpretations of
Jean-Paul Sartre
, University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State
University Press.
Renaudie, Pierre-Jean, 2017, “L’ambiguïté
de la troisième personne”,
Revue Philosophique de
Louvain
, 115(2): 269–287.
doi:10.2143/RPL.115.2.3245502
Reynolds, J. and P. Stokes, 2017, “Existentialist
Methodology and Perspective: Writing the First Person”, in
The Cambridge Companion to Philosophical Methodology
,
Giuseppina D’Oro and Søren Overgaard (eds.), Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 317–336.
doi:10.1017/9781316344118.017
Santoni, Ronald E., 1995,
Bad Faith, Good Faith, and
Authenticity in Sartre’s Early Philosophy
, Philadelphia,
PA: Temple University Press.
–––, 2003,
Sartre on Violence: Curiously
Ambivalent
, University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University
Press.
Schilpp, Paul Arthur (ed.), 1981,
The Philosophy of Jean-Paul
Sartre
, (Library of Living Philosophers 16), La Salle, IL: Open
Court.
Schroeder, William Ralph, 1984,
Sartre and His Predecessors:
The Self and the Other
, London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
doi:10.4324/9780429024511
Stone, Robert V. and Elizabeth A. Bowman, 1986, “Dialectical
Ethics: A First Look at Sartre’s Unpublished 1964 Rome Lecture
Notes”,
Social Text
, 13/14: 195–215.
–––, 1991, “Sartre’s ‘Morality
and History’: A First Look at the Notes for the unpublished 1965
Cornell Lectures”, in
Sartre Alive
, Ronald Aronson and
Adrian van den Hoven (eds), Detroit, MI: Wayne State University Press,
53–82.
Taylor, Charles, 1991,
The Ethics of Authenticity
,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Van den Hoven, Adrian and Andrew N. Leak (eds.), 2005,
Sartre
Today: A Centenary Celebration
, New York: Berghahn Books.
Webber, Jonathan (ed.), 2011,
Reading Sartre: On Phenomenology
and Existentialism
, London ; New York: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9780203844144
Walzer, Michael, 1995, “Preface” to the 1995 English
translation reprint of Sartre’s
Anti-semite and Jew
,
New York: Schocken Books.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up this entry topic
at the
Internet Philosophy Ontology Project
(InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Jean Paul Sartre: Existentialism
, 
 by Christian J. Onof at the
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
U.K. Sartre Society
North American Sartre Society
Groupe d'Études Sartriennes
Flynn, Thomas, “Jean-Paul Sartre”,
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Spring 2022 Edition),
Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = 
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2022/entries/sartre/
>.
 [This was the previous entry on this topic in the
Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
— see the
version history
.]
Related Entries
aesthetics: existentialist
|
authenticity
|
Beauvoir, Simone de
|
Camus, Albert
|
existentialism
|
Fanon, Frantz
|
Foucault, Michel
|
Heidegger, Martin
|
Husserl, Edmund
|
intentionality
|
Kierkegaard, Søren
|
Merleau-Ponty, Maurice
|
Négritude
|
Nietzsche, Friedrich
|
nothingness
|
phenomenology
|
self-consciousness: phenomenological approaches to
Acknowledgments
Jack would like to acknowledge Marion Tapper, who taught him Sartre as
an undergraduate student. In addition, he would like to thank Steven
Churchill, with whom he has worked on Sartre elsewhere and the work
here remains indebted to those conversations and collaborations.
Thanks also to Erol Copelj for feedback on this essay.