Joane Petrizi
First published Tue Aug 29, 2006; substantive revision Fri Sep 13, 2019
Joane Petrizi (12
th
century)—the most significant Georgian
medieval philosopher—devoted intensive work to neo-Platonic
philosophy. He translated Nemesius of Emesa’s
On the Nature of
Man
into Georgian, a work which in that day attracted considerable
attention. Of particular importance is his Georgian translation of
Proclus’s
Elementatio theologica
, to which he also wrote a
step-by-step commentary. Petrizi’s commentary on the
Elementatio
theologica
represents a significant effort at reception inasmuch
as the Georgian philosopher interprets the work immanently, that is, on
the basis of Proclus’s philosophy itself. Therefore, he definitely
deserves to receive increased attention in presentations and
reconstructions of the philosophy of Proclus, and especially in
research on medieval Proclus commentaries. Up to now, the standard
editions of the
Elementatio theologica
only mention Petrizi’s
Proclus work in passing (if at all), or even criticize it unjustly
(Dodds, pp. xli–xlii, 343; cf. in more detail Iremadze,
Konzeptionen
, pp. 225–231). Research on the Georgian
translation and interpretation of the
Elementatio theologica
in the context of Byzantine and Latin Proclus
interpreters—Nicholas of Methone (12
th
century),
Berthold of Moosburg (14
th
century), Henry Bate of Mechelen
(13
th
century)—will close this gap in Proclus
research. Furthermore, the reception by Byzantine philosophers of the
11
th
and 12
th
centuries (Psellos, Italos) should
not be overlooked.
1. The Person and his Work
2. Philosophy
3. Historical Reception and Influence
Bibliography
A. Primary Literature
B. Secondary Literature
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. The Person and his Work
To date there is no reliable information on Petrizi’s dates and
biography. According to older Georgian research, he lived in the second
half of the 11
th
century and the first half of the
12
th
century. More recent research, however, tends to date
him to the second half of the 12
th
century. The state of
research is aggravated by the lack of information on Petrizi. The
little personal information that is known about him stems from remarks
scattered through his works in which Petrizi briefly speaks about
himself. In his Proclus commentary—the
Interpretation of
the Elementatio theologica of Proclus
—and in the
Postscript
, which is traditionally ascribed to him, the author
mentions his own cares and problems.
According to authoritative reports, Petrizi translated Nemesius of
Emesa’s work
On the Nature of Man
into Georgian
(Petrizi,
Opera II
, p. 223).  According to these accounts,
Petrizi encountered numerous difficulties and obstacles put in his way
by both Greeks and Georgians because of his work. Based on the current
state of research on his work and on his biography, together with a
detailed study of his Proclus Commentary, Petrizi can be characterized
as a 12
th
-century thinker. The character of Georgian
thought in the 12
th
century is manifested in his style of
philosophizing and in his manner of presenting arguments, in his
knowledge of ancient philosophy and in his intellectual interest in
maintaining ancient thought in its rightful place.
Petrizi names the philosophers whom he treated in his
Interpretation
: Orpheus, Parmenides, Zeno, Plato, Aristotle,
Alexander of Aphrodisias, Porphyry and the Fathers of the Church
(Petrizi,
Opera I
, pp. XXVI–LII; Alexidse,
pp. 148–168). He held Platonic philosophy in particularly high
esteem. Its representatives included in his view both Plato’s
predecessors (Orpheus, Pythagoras, etc.) and the neo-Platonists. He
calls Plato ‘the philosopher of the day’
(Petrizi,
Opera I
, p.  XXVII). When Petrizi speaks of the
‘philosopher’, he means Proclus. By contrast, in the Latin
middle ages, the designation
philosophus
was reserved for Aristotle.
Among Plato’s works,
Petrizi refers to the dialogues
Parmenides
, the
Laws,
Phaedrus, Phaedo
and
Timaeus.
Although he does not
mention them, he also quotes
Theaetetus
and the
Symposium
(Petrizi,
Opera II
, pp. 34, 84). Petrizi
also mentions various works of Aristotle’s, but not the
pseudo-Aristotelian works used by Scholastic philosophers (Iremadze,
Konzeptionen
, p. 57). It can be gathered from his
Interpretation
that in addition to the
Elementatio
theologica
he also knew other works by Proclus (for example the
Parmenides
and
Timaeus
commentaries as well as the
Platonic Theology
) and drew on them as he saw fit in
commenting on the
Elementatio theologica
(Iremadze,
Konzeptionen
, p. 57).
2. Philosophy
Petrizi’s commentary on Proclus’s
Elementatio theologica
consists of a Preface (Introduction) and the commentaries to each
chapter of this work. In Sh. Nutsubidze and S. Kaukhchishvili’s
edition of Petrizi’s
Proclus Commentary
, these commentaries
are followed by an epilogue.
In his Introduction to the
Elementatio
theologica
, Joane Petrizi reflects on the sense (the
intentio)
of this book, and sees it in the proof of ‘the
much discussed One’ (Petrizi,
Commentaries
, p. 149).
Then he briefly treats the peculiarity of the One, which in his opinion
is not identical with any being. The pure and genuine One must be
examined and proved in accordance with the rules of syllogisms
(Petrizi,
Opera II
, p. 3). According to Petrizi’s exegesis,
this One is the crucial concept in the overall process of grounding
knowledge. If this principle is not provable, there are no
incontrovertible propositions and the goal of gnoseology will not be
reached. The One is the principle that makes knowledge possible.
In the
first chapter of his
Elementatio theologica
, Proclus treated
the One as the origin of all modes of multiplicity. Petrizi follows
this in his commentary to this proposition, presenting the arguments
for Proclus’s approach in his own way. Petrizi adheres primarily to the
basic axiom that the chain of beings requires an origin. Otherwise the
universe would have its origin in an Other, which for its part would
have to be the One inasmuch as the first principle (= the One) should
comprise all entities of the cosmos without exception. The One as the
cause and origin of being as such is deemed to be the better, and takes
on no qualities from what it causes. This One alone confers selfness to
all other entities because, as the generator and principle of
everything that follows it, it is in need of nothing.
The essential
features of the One (goodness, unity) are visible in each creature. If
the one were of the same value as the rest of being, then cosmic
harmony and its order would fail; furthermore, it would not be possible
to distinguish between the
first
and the
last
in the
series (Petrizi,
Opera
II, prop. 1, p. 13). The universe would
thus have no
first
and no
last
reference point, no
origin and no unities following it. It is precisely on the
impossibility of such an assumption that Petrizi’s ontological
reflections were based. In Petrizi’s view, the One is identical with
the Good. All Being presupposes the first Good because all creatures of
nature participate in this good and only possess good qualities by
virtue of their participation. Being is not by its own nature the Good,
but becomes a Good subsequently, by participation in the One.
Therefore, in Petrizi’s view a distinction must be made between the
Good in itself
and good entities inasmuch as the former is
above all nature and is a pure good in itself. Therefore, it is also
the goal of all Being, which constantly strives for it inasmuch as each
caused thing reverts to the cause (Petrizi,
Opera II
, prop. 8,
p. 33).
The Good is the archetype of Being as such, which, as its
image, also derives its status in the cosmos through participation in
the Good. This is so because of the identity of the Good with the One.
Because all entities only appear by virtue of participation in the One,
and because the One, taken in itself, is a pure Good, the Good is also
deemed to be the ultimate source and the super-simple reference point
of the universe. To characterize the Good, Petrizi adduces and uses
principles from Plato’s
Phaedrus
, treating the various degrees
of goodness. The first Good heads the Good, and thereafter follow the
various levels of goodnesses. The good is also deemed to be the
principle of order and structuring of Being. That which is first to be
linked to it has traces of the
Good in itself
, and the first
monads also have such a nature. It is precisely in these first entities
that Beauty and the Good are found (Petrizi,
Opera II
, prop.
8, p. 34).
In his
Proclus Commentary
, Joane Petrizi analyses the
dialectic hidden in the ‘cause’ and the
‘caused’ more thoroughly and in more detail than does
Proclus himself in the corresponding chapters of his
Elementatio
theologica
. In Petrizi’s exegesis, the abstract, mathematical
style of this work is augmented in content with a wealth of material.
Petrizi operates very often with visually illustrative examples, and is
careful to illuminate the theorems set forth in the
Elementatio
theologica
by means of human experience. This resulted from the
goals of his
Interpretation
. It primarily addressed a broad
public and served the study of this significant work from Greek
antiquity.
Petrizi treats the problem of the cause and the caused from
various perspectives, for the treatment of this topic proved to be of
fundamental importance for the logical structure of his philosophical
project. In Proposition 30, he treats the traditional view of the
dialectic of causality in detail, examining the etymological meanings
of the terms characteristically used in Greek for this relationship
(Petrizi,
Opera II
, prop. 30, pp. 79–81). The dialectic of
causality becomes manifest in the process of the descent from the One
to the Many and the ascent from the Many to the One. The cause is the
phase within the entirety of emanation that generates, that which thus
has priority both in ontological and in axiological terms
vis-à-vis the caused inasmuch as in the neo-Platonic system of
generation the generator is better than the generated.
With regard to
the problem of causality, Petrizi applied the criticism of the
Peripatetic doctrine of principles in critical discussion of the
Aristotelian concept of causes. In the realm of theoretical philosophy,
the system of four causes proved to be inadequate and flawed. In this
context, it seemed to Petrizi to be necessary to work out a new
conception of causality. He studied Proclus’s philosophy on the basis
of Greek sources, and regarded it as appropriate to his research goals
to adopt the existing structure of the system of causes. In this point,
he worked in the same way as Byzantine philosophers of the time such as
Psellos and Italos, who recognized the priority of Platonic philosophy
on this issue.
In Proposition 75 of his commentary, Petrizi
distinguishes five different modes of
causa
, characterizing
them
in nuce.
He adds a fifth kind of
causa
to the
traditional system of causes. In addition to the material, formal,
final and efficient causes he conceives a creative cause (Petrizi,
Opera II
, prop. 75, p. 136). It was, he claims, neglected in
the Aristotelians’ theoretical work, who, in contrast to Proclus,
had underestimated the relevance of the creative cause. This applies
both to Aristotle and to his interpreters, above all Alexander of
Aphrodisias, whom Petrizi criticizes in this connection (Petrizi,
Opera II
, prop. 11, p. 38).
One of the most important aspects of Petrizi’s philosophy is his
epistemology. It has only recently been reconstructed and
systematically researched in the light of the medieval discussion of
the essence of thought (cf. Iremadze,
Konzeptionen
, pp.
161–241). In his epistemology, Petrizi emphasizes the productive power
of (human) reason, which is capable of the real positing of being as
such and is thus a determinative principle of being.
3. Historical Reception and Influence
Joane Petrizi is the most widely read Georgian philosopher.
Petrizi’s
Proclus Commentary
with his Georgian translation of
the
Elementatio theologica
had a major influence not only on
Georgian philosophy and culture, but also outside of Georgia. In 1248,
the Armenian monk Svimeon translated Petrizi’s Proclus work into
Armenian, thus contributing to the dissemination of the philosophy of
Proclus there. In the 17
th
century, Armenian philosophers
devoted intensive work to Proclus’s thought, to which they attributed
contemporary relevance; in 1651, the Armenian bishop Svimeon Dshughaezi
wrote commentaries to facilitate the understanding of the
Elementatio theologica
. The basis for his commentary was the
13
th
-century Armenian translation by the monk Svimeon of
Petrizi’s Georgian translation.
In 1757, these commentaries, together
with the Armenian version of the
Elementatio theologica
, were
translated into Georgian; they have made a clear mark on Georgian
culture. Thus, in the 18
th
century there were at least two
different commentaries on the
Elementatio theologica
in
Georgian.
It must be emphasized that the thinkers of the Georgian
Enlightenment in the 17
th
and 18
th
centuries
reacted to these traditions in diverse ways. Some trenchantly
criticized the Armenian version with reference to its contents (see
below on Anton Bagrationi). But one point is certain: in the modern era in
Georgia, Proclus’s philosophy was the subject of intensive
consideration and interest by virtue of Petrizi’s works.
Let us here
have a look at three important stages of the Georgian reception of
Proclus and Petrizi.
(1) Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani (1658–1726) integrates numerous
theorems from Petrizi’s Proclus work into his
Georgian
Dictionary
. In the definition and discussion of the problem of
knowledge, he refers to the 20
th
proposition of
the
Interpretation
and determines reason as the simple,
bodiless knowledge of the known (Orbeliani, vol. I, p. 166,
col. 1–2). Other important philosophical definitions—for
example the determination of real being (Orbeliani, vol. I, p. 574,
col. 1), of production (Orbeliani, vol. II, p. 366, col. 2; p. 367,
col. 1), of causality (Orbeliani, vol. I, p.  480, col. 1–2), of
motion (Orbeliani, vol. I, p. 479, col. 2)—are taken from
Petrizi’s
Proclus Commentary
. In his
Georgian Dictionary
, Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani made equally
intensive reference to Petrizi’s Georgian translation of the work
On the Nature of Man
by Nemesius of Emesa.
(2) In his philosophical work
Spekali
(1752), the
philosopher and theologian Anton Bagrationi (1720–1788) refers to
Petrizi’s
Interpretation
, adopting numerous theorems of
neo-Platonic origin from him. Anton Bagrationi took some chapters
devoted to Proclus’s problem of knowledge almost verbatim from
Petrizi’s work (Anton I.,
Spekali
, pp. 327–331).
The last
chapters of
Spekali
are devoted to Petrizi. In chapters 148
and 149, Anton Bagrationi treats the topic of knowledge on the basis of
the propositions on
nous
in the
Interpretation
.
Following Petrizi, it is here claimed that
reasoned
knowledge
is different from the soul’s mode of knowledge. In its essence, the
activity and the substance of reason are a unity, whereas the nature of
the
soul
shows itself to be differentiated. The essence and
the activity of the soul can be distinguished inasmuch as knowledge is
not the
primary
quality of the soul. In its knowledge, the
soul proceeds from one being to another, that is, the acquired insights
are deemed to be the bases for the progress of knowledge. The knowledge
of
reason
has to be characterized differently, for its
activity is grounded in
eternal
knowing and can be seen as
nothing other than this activity. At this point it must be remarked
that Anton Bagrationi made intensive use of the
noetic
terminology of Petrizi’s
Proclus Commentary
to characterize
his concept of knowledge. His significant philosophical determinations
of noetics were worked out exclusively with reference to Petrizi.
Anton
Bagrationi was trenchantly critical of the Armenian version of the
Elementatio theologica
inasmuch as it did not represent
Proclus’s or Petrizi’s genuine doctrine. In his work
Theology
,
of which a critical edition has not yet been published, he claims that
true metaphysics was there combined with false theories and thus
disfigured. In his opinion, the old version (that is, Petrizi’s
version) of the
Elementatio theologica
should be studied
rather than the new (Armenian) version. Admittedly, he sided with
Petrizi in this point: Petrizi’s interpretation of Proclus’s philosophy
should be accepted rather than its arbitrary transformation by modern
Armenian and Georgian interpreters.
(3) In contrast to Anton Bagrationi, Joane Bagrationi
(1768–1830) mainly relied on the Armenian commentaries on
the
Elementatio theologica
in his main
work,
Kalmasoba
, which is written in dialogue form. In the
determination of the One and its dialectics, he quotes the first
chapters of Proclus’s work. Furthermore, the chapters on
nous
(for example prop. 20) are given adequate consideration
in
Kalmasoba
. In this work, Joane Bagrationi does not comment
on all the chapters of the
Elementatio theologica
; a total of
86 chapters were commented on. It is remarkable that the author
interprets or transforms some passages of Proclus’s and Petrizi’s work
in an original manner; in the discussion of the problem of cause, he
begins by distinguishing three main kinds—God, nature and
skill—and emphasizes God’s superiority to all other
causes. Joane Bagrationi made use of Svimeon Dshughaezi’s
commentaries, attempting to interpret Proclus and Petrizi with their
help. Furthermore, Joane Bagrationi brought clarity to the noetics of
the
Elementatio theologica
, characterizing the various kinds
and functions of knowledge and designating the knowing soul as
specific to man.
Although Joane Petrizi’s work received increasing attention in the
course of time and Georgian thinkers always emphasized his intellectual
heritage, a thorough-going scholarly treatment of Petrizi’s works only
really began in the 20
th
century. Without a doubt, the most
important stage in Petrizi research is represented by the publication
of a scholarly edition of Petrizi’s philosophical works. The edition
began in 1937 with the publication of the second volume of Petrizi’s
Proclus work—the
Intertpretation of the “Elementatio
theologica” of Proclus
. This volume was edited by Sh.
Nutsubidze and S. Kaukhchishvili; it includes a comprehensive and
valuable study of Petrizi’s philosophy in which the teaching of the
Georgian philosopher is viewed as reflected by his contemporaries and
analysed with reference to Byzantine and Georgian medieval thought.
The
first volume of Petrizi’s Proclus work (
The Elementatio theologica
of the Platonic Philosopher Proclus
) was published in 1940. This
volume contains the Georgian translation of the
Elementatio
theologica
from the Greek. The editor was S. Kaukhchishvili; M.
Gogiberidze wrote an introduction to the volume. It also contains a
comprehensive vocabulary for both volumes, also compiled by S.
Kaukhchishvili. In the 20
th
century, Petrizi’s
Interpretation
was translated into Russian. The Russian
translation of 1984 with an introduction and annotations by G. Tevzadze
is of particular importance. After the publication of scholarly
editions of Petrizi’s works, both philosophical and philological
problems of the Proclus commentary have been subject to thorough-going
research (for a detailed account of the state of Petrizi research, cf.
Iremadze,
Konzeptionen
, pp. 13–27).
Bibliography
A. Primary Literature
1. Petrizi’s Works
Joane Petrizi,
Interpretation of the “Elementatio
theologica” of Proclus
, ed. and with a study by Sh.
Nutsubidze and S. Kaukhchishvili (Opera II), Tbilisi 1937 (in Old
Georgian).
–––,
The “Elementatio theologica” of the
Platonic Philosopher Proclus
, trans. from the Greek, ed. and with
a study and a vocabulary by S. Kaukhchishvili, with an introduction
by M. Gogiberidze (Opera I), Tbilisi 1940 (in Old Georgian).
–––,
Rassmotrenie platonovskoi filosofii i Prokla
diadokha.
Perevod c drevnegruzinskogo jazyka I. D. Pantskhavy.
Redaktori toma G. V. Tevzadze, N. R. Natadze. Vstupitelnaja statia i
primechanija G. V. Tevzadze, Moskva 1984 (in Russian).
–––,
Kommentare zur “Elementatio theologica”
des Proklos.
Selected Texts, translated from Old Georgian into
German, introduction and annotations by L. Alexidze, in
Orthodoxes
Forum
, Munich 9 (1995), pp. 141–171.
–––,
Interpretation of the “Elementatio
theologica” of Proclus Diadochus
, trans. into modern
Georgian, with an introduction and annotations by D. Melikishvili,
Tbilisi 1999.
–––,
Kommentar zur “Elementatio
theologica” des Proclos
, Übersetzung aus dem
Altgeorgischen, Anmerkungen, Indices und Einleitung von L. Alexidze
und L. Bergemann, Amsterdam/Philadelphia 2009.
Nemesius of Emesa,
On the Nature of Man
, trans. into Old
Georgian by Joane Petrizi, ed. with an introduction and vocabulary by
S. Gorgadze, Tbilisi 1914.
2. Other Authors
Anton I. (= Bagrationi), 1991,
Spekali
, ed., with a study and
vocabulary by G. Dedabrishvili, Tbilisi (in Georgian).
Joane Bagrationi, 1974,
Kalmasoba.
Philosophical Part
,
ed. by G. Dedabrishvili (Studies on the History of Georgian
Philosophical Thought, vol. III), Tbilisi  (in Georgian).
Proclus, 1963,
The Elements of Theology.
A revised Text with
Translation, Introduction and Commentary by E. R. Dodds, Oxford,
2
nd
edition.
Sulkhan-Saba Orbeliani, 1991,
Georgian Dictionary
, 2 vols., ed.,
with a study and vocabulary by I. Abuladze, Tbilisi (in
Georgian).
B. Secondary Literature
Alexidze, L., 1997, “Griechische Philosophie in den
‘Kommentaren’ des Joane Petrizi zur ‘Elementatio
Theologica’ des Proklos”, in
Oriens Christianus. Hefte
für die Kunde des christlichen Orients
, 81:
148–168.
Dodashvili, S., 2001, “Brief Discussion of Georgian
Literature”, in S. Dodashvili,
Works
, ed. and with a
preface by T. Kukava, Tbilisi 2001, pp. 214–220 (in Georgian).
Gogiberidze, M., 1961,
Rustaveli, Petrizi, Preludes
, ed. by I.
Megrelidze, Tbilisi (in Georgian).
Iremadze, T., 2004,
Konzeptionen des Denkens im
Neuplatonismus. Zur Rezeption der Proklischen Philosophie im deutschen
und georgischen Mittelalter: Dietrich von Freiberg—Berthold von
Moosburg—Joane Petrizi
, Amsterdam/Philadelphia.
–––, 2004, “Der intellekttheoretische Ansatz der
Selbstreflexivität des Denkens gemäß Kapitel 168 der
‘Elementatio theologica’ des Proklos und seine Deutung
sowie Entfaltung im ‘Proklos-Kommentar’ Bertholds von
Moosburg”, in W. Geerlings / C. Schulze (eds.),
Der
Kommentar in Antike und Mittelalter
, Bd. 2:
Neue Beiträge
zu seiner Erforschung
(Clavis Commentariorum Antiquitatis et Medii
Aevi 3), Leiden/Boston,  pp. 237–253.
–––, 2007, “Die Philosophie der
Selbstreflexivität”,
in
Philosophy—Theology—Culture. Problems and
Perspectives: Jubilee volume dedicated to the 75
th
anniversary of Guram Tevzadze
, ed. T. Iremadze, T. Tskhadadze,
G. Kheoshvili, Tbilisi, pp. 66–78.
–––, 2009, “Joane Petrizi ”,
in
Philosophenlexikon
, ed. S. Jordan, B. Mojsisch, Philipp
Reclam Verlag, Stuttgart, pp. 285–286.
–––, 2011, “Seiendes
versus
Sein. Zu einer neuen Interpretation der Gattungslehre von Joane
Petrizi”, in
Philosophy in Global Change: Jubilee volume
dedicated to the 65
th
anniversary of Burkhard
Mojsisch
, ed. T. Iremadze (in collaboration with H. Schneider
and K. J. Schmidt), Tbilisi, pp. 133–139.
–––, 2011, “Zur Rezeption und
Transformation der Aristotelischen und Proklischen Ursachenmodelle bei
Joane Petrizi”, in
Archiv für mittelalterliche Philosophie
und Kultur
(Heft XVII), Sofia, pp. 96–111.
–––, 2013, “Secular and Divine Wisdom in
Medieval Georgian Thought (Anonymous Author, Ephrem Mtsire, Joane
Petrizi)”, in T. Iremadze,
Philosophy at the Crossroads of
Epochs and Cultures. Intercultural and Interdisciplinary
Researches
, Tbilisi, pp. 16–25 (in Georgian).
–––, 2015, “Die erkennende Seele des
Menschen und ihre Funktion im Proklos-Kommentar von Joane
Petrizi”, in
Quaestio
(
Yearbook of the History of
Metaphysics
), 15.  [
The Pleasure of Knowledge
, ed. by
P. Porro and L. Sturlese], Brepols: Turnhout, pp. 201–209.]
–––, 2016, “The Pythagorean Doctrine in
the Caucasus”, in
Pythagorean Knowledge from the Ancient to
the Modern World: Askesis, Religion, Science
, ed. by
A.–B. Renger and A. Stavru (
Episteme in Bewegung. Beiträge
zu einer transdisziplinären Wissensgeschichte
, Bd. 4), Wiesbaden,
pp. 411–422.
–––, 2018, “Philosophy and theology in
medieval Georgian thought? (Anonymous author, Ephrem Mtsire, Ioane
Petritsi)”, in
Veritas et subtilitas. Truth and Subtlety in
the History of Philosophy. Essays in memory of Burkhard Mojsisch
(1944–2015)
, ed. by T. Iremadze and U. R. Jeck,
Amsterdam/Philadelphia, pp. 127–134.
–––, 2019,
Medieval Georgian Philosophy. A
Systematic Outline to Understand its Specifics
, Tbilisi (in
Georgian).
Jeck, U. R., 2010,
Erläuterungen zur georgischen
Philosophie
, Tbilisi (in German and Georgian).
–––, 2017, “Europa entdeckt die
mittelalterliche byzantinisch-georgische Philosophie. Klaproth,
Sjögren, Brosset und Creuzer über Ioane Petrizi”,
in
Byzantine Perspectives of Neoplatonism
, ed. by S. Mariev,
Boston/Berlin, pp. 243–270.
Kekelidze, K., 1960,
History of Georgian Literature
(Volume 1: Old Georgian Literature), Tbilisi (in Georgian).
Khidasheli, Sh., 1956,
Joane Petrizi
, Tbilisi  (in
Georgian).
–––, 1988,
History of Georgian
Philosophy
, Tbilisi, p. 170–197 (in Georgian).
Marr, N., 1909,
Joane Petrizi—the Georgian Neo-Platonist of
the XI
th
–XII
th
Century
, St. Petersburg
(in Russian).
Melikishvili, D., 1975,
The Language and Style of Joane Petrizi’s
Philosophical Works
, Tbilisi (in Georgian).
Mojsisch, B., 2002, “Die Theorie des Intellekts bei Berthold
von Moosburg. Zur Proklosrezeption im Mittelalter”, in
Th. Kobusch, B. Mojsisch, O. F. Summerell
(eds.),
Selbst—Singularität—Subjektivität. Vom
Neuplatonismus zum Deutschen Idealismus
, Amsterdam/Philadelphia,
pp.  175–184.
Mtschedlishvili, L., 1997,  “On the Interpretation of a Passage in
Joane Petrizi’s ‘Interpretation’”, in
Matsne
,
Philosophical Series 1 (Tbilisi), pp. 62–67 (in Georgian).
Nutsubidze, Sh., 1988,
History of Georgian Philosophy
(Collected
Works in six volumes, vol. 5), Tbilisi  (in Russian).
Tavadze, G., 2013,
The Power of Maps. Gelati and the Concept
of Caucasian Philosophy in the Context of Intercultural
Philosophy
, Tbilisi (in Georgian).
Tevzadze, G., 1981, “The Principle of Analogy in Joane
Petrizi’s Philosophy”, in G. Tevzadze (ed.),
Problems
of the History of Medieval Philosophy
, vol. 1, Tbilisi,
pp. 227–241 (in Georgian).
–––, 1982, “Johannes Petrizi”, in
E. Lange, D.  Alexander (eds.),
Philosophen-Lexikon
, Berlin,
p.  447.
–––, 1993, “Joane Petrizi on the Determination of
Man”, in
Iweria
. Journal of the Georgian-European
Institute 3 (Tbilisi and Brussels), pp. 83–98 (in Georgian).
–––, 1996, “The Philosophy of Joane Petrizi”, in
Sh. Khidasheli, M. Makharadze (eds.),
History of Georgian
Philosophical Thought
(Volume 1), Tbilisi, pp. 181–249 (in
Georgian).
–––, 2002, “Die Kategorie der
Subjektivität in Joane Petrizis Kommentar zu Proklos”, in
Th. Kobusch, B. Mojsisch, O.  F. Summerell
(Hrsg.),
Selbst—Singularität—Subjektivität. Vom
Neuplatonismus zum Deutschen Idealismus
, Amsterdam/Philadelphia,
pp. 131–154.
Tschelidze, E., 1994, “Life and Work of Joane Petrizi”, Part
I in
Religia
[Religion] 3-4-5 (Tbilisi), pp. 113–126
(in Georgian).
–––, 1995,  “Life and Work of Joane Petrizi”, Part
II in
Religia
[Religion] 1-2-3 (Tbilisi), pp. 76–89 (in
Georgian).
Zakaradze, L., 2011, “Proclus in the Georgian and Latin
Middle Ages (Ioane Petritsi and Berthold of Moosburg)”,
in
Philosophy in Global Change: Jubilee volume dedicated to the
65
th
anniversary of Burkhard Mojsisch
, ed. T. Iremadze
(in collaboration with H. Schneider and K. J. Schmidt), Tbilisi,
pp. 125–132.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
[Please contact the author with suggestions.]
Related Entries
Neoplatonism
|
Proclus