Johann Georg Hamann
First published Sat Jun 29, 2002; substantive revision Sat Feb 5, 2022
Johann Georg Hamann (1730–1788) lived and worked in Prussia, in
the context of the late German Enlightenment. Although he remained
outside ‘professional’ philosophical circles, in that he
never held a University post, he was respected in his time for his
scholarship and breadth of learning. His writings were notorious even
in his own time for the challenges they threw down to the reader.
These challenges to interpretation and understanding are only
heightened today.
Nevertheless an increasing number of scholars from philosophy,
theology, aesthetics and German studies are finding his ideas and
insights of value to contemporary concerns. His central preoccupations
are still pertinent: language, knowledge, the nature of the human
person, sexuality and gender and the relationship of humanity to God.
Meanwhile, his views, which in many respects anticipate later
challenges to the Enlightenment project and to modernity, are still
relevant and even provocative.
1. Life
2. Writings
3. Metacritique
4. Relation
5. The Union of Opposites
6. ‘Prosopopoeia’
7. Enlightenment
8. Language
9. Knowledge
10. Interpretation and Understanding
11. Humanity
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Life
Johann Georg Hamann was born in Königsberg in 1730, the son of a
midwife and a barber-surgeon. He began study in philosophy and
theology at the age of 16, changed to law but mainly read literature,
philology, and rhetoric, but also mathematics and science. He left
university without completing his studies and became the governor to a
wealthy family on a Baltic estate. During this time he continued his
extraordinarily broad reading and private research. He took up a job
in the family firm of a friend from his Königsberg days,
Christoph Berens, and was sent on an obscure mission to London, in
which he evidently failed. He then led a high life until he ran out of
friends, money and support. In a garret, depressed and impoverished,
he read the Bible cover to cover and experienced a religious
conversion.
He returned to the House of Berens in Riga, where they evidently
forgave him his failure. He fell in love with Christoph Berens’
sister, Katharina, but was refused permission to marry her by his
friend, on the grounds of his religious conversion; Berens was an
enthusiastic follower of the Enlightenment and was nauseated by the
more pious manifestations of Hamann’s new-found religiosity.
Smarting from this blow and its motivations, Hamann returned to his
father’s house in Königsberg, where he lived for the rest
of his life until his final months.
In Königsberg, he never held an official academic post, nor an
ecclesiastical one; this may in part have been due to his pronounced
speech impediment, which inhibited him from either lecturing or
preaching. Eventually, through the intercession of his acquaintance,
Immanuel Kant, he found employment as a low-level civil servant
working in the tax office of Frederick the Great; a ruler Hamann in
fact despised. Nevertheless his principal activity was as an editor
and a writer; he was considered one of the most widely-read scholars
of his time (greatly aided by his fluency in many languages), as well
as a notorious author. During this time, despite his committed
Christianity, he lived with a woman whom he never married but to whom
he remained devoted and faithful, having four children on whom he
doted, and who occasionally feature in his writings (principally as
unruly distractions to the author’s scholarship).
At the end of his life he accepted an invitation to Münster from
one of his admirers, Princess Gallitzin. He died in Münster in
1788.
Hamann had a profound influence on the German ‘Storm and
Stress’ movement, and on other contemporaries such as Herder and
Jacobi; he impressed Hegel and Goethe (who called him the brightest
head of his time) and was a major influence on Kierkegaard. His
influence continued on twentieth century German thinkers, particularly
those interested in language. His popularity has increased
dramatically in the last few decades amongst philosophers,
theologians, and German studies scholars around the world.
2. Writings
Hamann’s writings are all short; he was not given to extensive
treatises. They are also usually motivated by something very specific:
someone else’s publication, or particular circumstances and
events. When responding to these, he presupposes considerable
knowledge on the part of the reader; typically his responses to the
work of others involves adoption of their terminology and style,
blending into mimicry and parody as a rhetorical and argumentative
device. Moreover, woven into these writings is an extraordinary
breadth and quantity of citations and allusions; and by no means are
these all clear and obvious. Thus, when he chooses, his essays are a
tapestry of multicolored threads of the ideas, language, and imagery
of thinkers, be they ancient, biblical, or contemporary. These are
woven across a woof of a love of irony, which as ever adds a layer of
interpretative complexity.
Hamann’s writings also frequently appear under the name of
various fanciful characters: Aristobolus, the Knight of the
Rose-Cross, the Sibyl, Adelgunde. It cannot be assumed that such
characters faithfully represent Hamann’s own views; The opinions
of Aristobolus, for example, are a device to deconstruct and drive to
absurdity a number of views which Hamann opposes.
These factors combine to make Hamann’s writings notoriously
difficult to understand and interpret. Goethe observed that when
reading Hamann, “one must completely rule out what one normally
means by understanding” [Goethe, 550]. Even if one has –
or painfully acquires, or borrows from other current scholars –
the breadth of reference to understand the source of an allusion or
citation, it is not always clear what the citation is doing there, and
what Hamann means to suggest by referring to it. He delighted in
sporting with his reader; preferring to present a balled fist and
leave it to the reader to unroll it into a flat hand (to borrow one of
his own images; cf. the end of the “Metacritique of the Purism
of Reason”, 1780).
This impenetrability has been taken by some to signify an incapacity
for clear expression on Hamann’s part. Hegel remarked:
“The French have a saying:
Le stile c’est
l’homme meme
(‘The style is the man himself’);
Hamann’s writings do not
have
a particular style but
rather
are
style through and through” [Hegel, 209].
Others, however, have pointed to the clarity and concision of his
letters, in contrast to the puzzling style he uses to address the
public. They suggest that Hamann’s challenging style forms are
an important part of Hamann’s hermeneutics and his understanding
of the relationship between the writer and reader: two halves of a
whole who must relate themselves to one another and unite for a common
goal (“Reader and Critic”, 1762). The reader cannot be
passive and must work to reconstruct Hamann’s meaning. As Hamann
observed, “A writer who is in a hurry to be understood today or
tomorrow runs the danger of being misunderstood the day after
tomorrow.”
Consequently, Hamann is highly susceptible to misinterpretation. For
example, one can find in recent English-language treatments the
understanding of Hamann as an ‘irrationalist’, and one who
simply opposed the Enlightenment with all his might; this however is
not supported by the majority of Hamann scholars and is seen as a
failure to understand the complexity of his thinking.
His principal writings include:
Biblische Betrachtungen
[Biblical Reflections],
Gedanken über meinen Lebenslauf
[Thoughts on the Course of my Life],
Brocken
[Fragments],
Sokratische Denkwürdigkeiten
[Socratic Memorabilia],
Wolken
[Clouds],
Kreuzzüge des Philologen
[Crusades of the Philologian], a collection of essays including
Aesthetica in Nuce,
Versuch über eine akademische Frage
[Essay on an academic question], and
Kleeblatt Hellenistischer
Briefe
[Cloverleaf of Hellenistic Letters];
Schriftsteller
und Kunstrichter
[Author and Critic],
Leser und
Kunstrichter
[Reader and Critic],
Fünf Hirtenbriefe
[Five Pastoral Letters],
Des Ritters von Rosencreuz letzte
Willensmeynung über den göttlichen und menschlichen Urprung
der Sprache
[The Knight of the Rose-Cross’ Last Will and
Testament on the divine and human origin of language],
Philologische Einfälle und Zweifel
[Philological Ideas
and Doubts],
Hierophantische Briefe
[Hierophantic Letters],
Versuch einer Sibylle über die Ehe
[Essay of a Sibyl on
Marriage],
Konxompax, Metakritik über den Purismum der
Vernunft
[Metacritique of the Purism of Reason],
Golgotha und
Scheblimini
[Golgotha and Scheblimini],
Fliegender Brief
[Flying Letter].
3. Metacritique
At the end of his life, Hamann chose to designate his authorship as
“Metacritique”, a word he coined for his engagement with
Kant’s
Critique of Pure Reason
. Instead of creating a
systematic theology, or an epistemology, he seems to have seen his
work as one that examines the foundations and nature of philosophical
and theological critique itself. Rather like the late Wittgenstein,
his work was deconstructive; he belongs in the camp of philosophers
whom Richard Rorty has described as “edifying and
therapeutic” rather than “constructive and
systematic” (Rorty, 5–6). He brings to any issue in
philosophy not a constructive account, but an approach, a set of
convictions, something akin to ethical principles. He anticipated
Rorty’s emphasis on the curative aspects of this task; at the
end of his life, he wanted his collected works to be published under
the title “Curative Baths”
(“
Saalbadereyen
” — a reference to healing
practices of the time and an allusion to his father’s
profession.) Each volume was to be called a ‘Tub’. This
project was sadly never realized, not even under a more conventional
title.
One abiding characteristic of Hamann’s many responses to the
philosophy of his time, therefore, is this ‘metacritical’
instinct: not to construct a rival account, but to go for the jugular;
not to set up a rival critique, but to insist that critique itself
must be subject to meta-critique, which concerns itself with the
issues that must be attended to in relation to the act of
philosophical reflection itself. It consists of attention to the
fundamental stance or position on issues or insights that must
underlie any work on philosophy or theology. According to Hamann,
often “the difficulties lie in womb of the concepts” (N
III, 31, 21). Hamann’s writing therefore is not so much
‘unsystematic’ as is sometimes said, but
‘presystematic’. He addresses issues that must be
recognized in any self-critical reflection, matters that must be
presuppositions for any system. Thus one of the most salient features
of his “Metacritique of the Purism of Reason”, his
unpublished response to Kant’s
Critique of Pure Reason
,
was to focus on the question of language. Through a tissue of imagery,
he suggests that a proper view of language implies that the alleged
‘purity’ of
a priori
reason is untenable.
These metacritical issues, for Hamann, principally include language,
knowledge, and the nature of the human person. Hamann also, most
urgently and most controversially (then as now), did not believe that
any of these issues can be answered outside a theological perspective;
that is, without reference to God as humanity’s creator and
dialogue partner.
4. Relation
A second feature of Hamann’s approach is a tendency which Goethe
saw as holism. This is perhaps not the best way to describe
Hamann’s insight, as Hamann characteristically emphasised the
brokenness of human experience, and fragmentariness of human
knowledge: “Gaps and lacks … is the highest and deepest
knowledge of human nature, through which we must climb our way up to
the ideal — ideas and doubts — the
summum bonum
of our reason” (ZH 3, 34:33–35). Hamann essentially
disliked attempts to isolate the phenomenon under consideration from
other aspects with which he felt it to be intimately connected; this
precludes a deep and true understanding of our existence. Taken as far
as he did, this means that philosophy of language must include a
discussion of God, and a discussion of God must make reference to
sexuality and
vice versa
.
Thus in “Essay of a Sibyl on Marriage”, which he takes as
an opportunity to write about sex, a proper understanding of human
sexuality and erotic enjoyment cannot be understood without seeing
humanity as the creature of God, made in God’s image. He plays
with the Christian idea of God as a Trinity to depict a trinity of
woman-man-God in the moment of lovemaking; and reworks the account of
the creation of Adam in Genesis to describe the act of coitus itself.
The woman on perceiving her lover in his excitement sees ‘that
rib’ and cries out in enthusiastic appropriation, ‘That is
bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh!’ The man then
‘fills the hole of the place with flesh’ (as Genesis
describes God doing with Adam after the creation of Eve). In doing so
the lover also acknowledges that the origin of a man is in
woman’s body: the ‘Sibyl’ describes this moment of
lovemaking as “he entered in whence he once came forth.”
Indeed, as Christ was born of a woman, the salvation of humanity
proceeds from a woman’s sexual body; the vagina is also
described as the place that the Saviour came forth as the body’s
healer (the German language permits Hamann here to pun on
‘healer’ and ‘saviour’). This inclination to
combine topics more often kept separate (such as ‘the concept of
God’ and ‘having sex’) is salient throughout his
work.
5. The Union of Opposites
Hamann’s tool for conceiving the interrelation of these
dimensions of human life increasingly was the Principle of the Union
of Opposites. He writes approvingly of this principle to his friends;
particularly after his encounter with Kant’s new epistemology,
claiming to value it more than the principles of contradiction and of
sufficient reason, and indeed more than the whole Kantian Critique (ZH
5, 327:12ff; ZH 4, 462:7–8). Contradictions and apparent
oppositions fill our experience:
Yes, daily at home I have the experience that one must always
contradict oneself from two viewpoints, [which] never can agree, and
that it is impossible to change these viewpoints into the other
without doing the greatest violence to them. Our knowledge is
piecemeal — no dogmatist is in a position to feel this great
truth, if he is to play his role and play it well; and through a
vicious circle of pure reason skepsis itself becomes dogma (ZH 5,
432:29–36). (This is in the context of a discussion of
Kant.)
Far from being a pre-condition for truth, the absence of contradiction
is in Hamann’s eyes a pre-condition for dogmatism. Knowledge
must not proceed on the basis of unanimity and the absence of
contradiction, but must proceed through the dialogue and relation of
these different voices. (Hamann does not think in terms of
Hegel’s later dialectical synthesis.) When Hamann speaks of
‘opposition’ and contradictions, however, he does so in an
ironic tone; for it is clearly his conviction that there is a
fundamental unity in things, and the oppositions and contradictions
that we perceive are chiefly of our own making. He insists that his
perception is ‘without Manichaeism’ (ZH 5,
327:16–17). Body and mind, senses and reason, reason and passion
are not truly opposed. These are contrasting elements of the same
unified — unified but not homogenous — reality. Hamann
tries to steer a course between Scylla and Charybdis: between the
dogmatic, even tyrannical extermination of opposition and
contradiction; and the elimination of contradiction through a false
synthesis or fusion achieved by an apparent acceptance of antithetical
realities.
The Principle of the Union of Opposites as a tactical tool, therefore,
does not imply that Hamann sees the world in terms of divisions and
dualism. It is his strategy for coping with the schematic antitheses
abundant in Enlightenment philosophy.
Nothing seems easier than the leap from one extreme to the other, and
nothing so difficult as the union to a center. … [The Union of
Opposites] always seems to me to be the one sufficient reason of all
contradictions — and the true process of their resolution and
mediation, that makes an end to all feuds of healthy reason and pure
unreason. (ZH 4, 287:5–17)
6. ‘Prosopopoeia’
Hamann used the notion of ‘Prosopopoeia’, or
personification, as an image of what can happen in philosophical
reflection. In a medieval morality or mystery play, the experience of
being chaste or being lustful is transformed from a way of acting or
feeling into a dramatic character who then speaks and acts as a
personification of that quality. So too in philosophy, Hamann
suggests. The philosopher distinguishes differing aspects in the
phenomenon under scrutiny and exaggerates their difference. These
aspects are ennobled into faculties, and through
‘prosopopoeia’ are hypostasized into entities. Thus in the
act of reflecting on something, ‘reasoning’ is
distinguished from ‘feeling’, and turned from a verb or
gerund into a noun — ‘reason’—which is then
named as a constituent of our being. Reason then becomes a thing to
which we can ascribe properties. (This shows perhaps a streak
bordering on nominalism in Hamann.)
The best example of this, and of Hamann’s response, is his
treatment of the word ‘reason’. Since he handles it with a
kind of skepticism or even distaste, he is often called an
‘irrationalist’. It is clear however that Hamann puts a
high value on certain ways of being reasonable and of reasoning
activity. “Without
language
we would have no reason,
without reason no religion, and without these three essential aspects
of our nature, neither mind
[Geist]
nor bond of
society” (N III, 231, 10–12).
Hamann’s treatment of reason instead is a deconstruction, both
of the prosopopoeic use of the word and the Enlightenment valuation of
it. There is no such thing as reason — there is only reasoning.
Reasoning, as something we do, is as fallible as we are, and as such
is subject to our position in history, or own personality, or the
circumstances of the moment. ‘It’ is therefore not a
universal, healthy and infallible ‘faculty’ as
Hamann’s Enlightenment contemporaries often maintained:
Being, belief and reason
are pure relations, which cannot be
dealt with absolutely, and are not things but pure scholastic
concepts,
signs
for understanding, not for worshipping, aids
to awaken our attention, not to fetter it. (ZH 7, 165:7–11)
7. Enlightenment
Hamann is sometimes portrayed simply as an opponent of “the
Enlightenment”. This presupposes of course that “the
Enlightenment” constitutes a unified stance on a number of
philosophical issues, an assumption which is questionable. The
majority of Hamann scholars today see his position in a more complex
way. Hamann opposed many of the popular convictions of his time.
However, Hamann fought his contemporaries on many fronts; therefore
there were often areas of considerable agreement with some of his
opponents. One example would be the way that he deployed Hume as a
weapon against Enlightenment rationalism, not least against Kant
(although Hamann was the one who introduced Kant to Hume’s
writings in the first place). Although Hamann, as a Christian, had
profound disagreements with Hume’s thought in its atheistic
aspects, nevertheless he used Humean skepticism in his own
deconstructive writings. Hume’s doubts about the reliability and
self-sufficiency of reason were grist to Hamann’s mill.
Hume’s insistence that “belief” underlies much of
our thinking and reasoning was adopted and deployed by Hamann, often
with a linguistic sleight of hand. By using the word
“
Glaube
” (which in German includes both
“belief” in an epistemic sense and “faith” in
a religious sense), Hamann could assert that “faith”, not
rational grounds, underlies his contemporaries’ high valuation
of reason. Thus even the enthusiastic advocates of impartiality and
“reason”, who are also skeptics about “blind
faith”, have ultimately only faith as the ground for their
convictions.
Judging from letters late in his life, Hamann preferred to be seen as
a “metacritic” of the Enlightenment. His dissatisfactions
with what he viewed as a certain Enlightenment program began early,
following his conversion to Christianity; and his challenge could be
seen not as a blunt, unreasoning opposition to rationality, but as a
deeper (and more disruptive) challenge to what rationality and
Enlightenment actually consist in. Often these are seen in his
resonses to his friend Immanuel Kant. An early challenge came in his
first public essay, “Socratic Memorabilia” (1759), which
was dedicated to Kant and their mutual friend Christoph Berens. Kant
and Berens had sought to cast him as a campaigner on behalf of the
Enlightenment. In the essay he portrays Socrates, the hero of the
Enlightenment, as a Christ-figure rather than a champion of secular
reason. Hamann’s abreaction to what he viewed as a misguided
deification and purification of reason reaches a climax in 1784, in
his unpublished response to Kant — “Metacritique of the
Purism of Reason” (1984) and in an inflamed private letter to
Christian Jacob Kraus in the same year. This letter takes issue with
Kant’s famous essay “An Answer to the Question: What is
Enlightenment?” (1984). Here he argues that what Kant describes
as the intellectual “self-incurred minority” (minority in
the sense of being a minor, immaturity, tutelage) of the general
public, an (alleged) need to be told what to think, is not
self-imposed. Rather, it is imposed, Hamann suggests, on the one hand
by a politically authoritarian regime hostile to dissent and political
free-thinking, while encouraging religious free-thinking; and on the
other hand by professional experts: the “prattle and reasoning
of those emancipated immature ones, who set themselves up as
guardians”. “True enlightenment,” Hamann concludes
sarcastically, “consists in an emergence of the immature person
from a supremely self-incurred guardianship.”
8. Language
Language is one of Hamann’s most abiding philosophical concerns.
From the beginning of his work, Hamann championed the priority which
expression and communication, passion and symbol possess over
abstraction, analysis and logic in matters of language. Neither logic
nor even representation (in Rorty’s sense) possesses the rights
of the first-born. Representation is secondary and derivative rather
than the whole function of language. Symbolism, imagery, metaphor have
primacy; “Poetry is the mother-tongue of the human race”
(N II, 197). To think that language is essentially a passive system of
signs for communicating thoughts is to deal a deathblow to true
language.
For all Hamann’s emphasis in his earlier writings on passion and
emotion, he does not equate language with emotional expression. This
became clear in his engagement with the writing of his younger friend
Herder on the origin of language. Language has a mediating
relationship between our reflection, one another, and our world; and
as it is not simply the cries of emotion of an animal, so too it is
not a smothering curtain between us and the rest of reality. Language
also has a mediating role between God and us. Hamann’s answer to
a debate of his time, the origin of language — divine or
human?—is that its origin is found in the relationship between
God and humanity. Typically he has the ‘Knight of the
Rose-Cross’ express this in the form of a ‘myth’,
rather than attempting to work out such a claim logically and
systematically. Rewriting the story of the Garden of Eden, he
describes this paradise as:
Every phenomenon of nature was a word,—the sign, symbol and
pledge of a new, mysterious, inexpressible but all the more intimate
union, participation and community of divine energies and ideas.
Everything the human being heard from the beginning, saw with its
eyes, looked upon and touched with its hands was a living word; for
God was the word. (NIII, 32: 21–30)
This makes the origin of language as easy and natural as child’s
play.
By the end of his life, because of his engagement with Kant, the most
urgent question among the relationships that constitute language is
the relationship of language to thinking or ‘reason’. In
his view, the central question of Kant’s first
Critique
, the very possibility of
a priori
knowledge
and of pure reason, depends on the nature of language. In a passage
full of subtle allusions to Kantian passages and terms, he writes:
Indeed, if a chief question does remain:
how is the power to think
possible?
—The power to think
right
and
left,
before
and
without, with
and
above
experience?
then it does not take a deduction to prove the genealogical priority
of language…. Not only the entire ability to think rests on
language... but language is also the
crux of the misunderstanding
of reason with itself
. (N III, 286:1–10)
Language is forced to take part in the ‘purification of
philosophy’, as he describes it in his Metacritique of Kant: the
attempt to expunge experience and tradition from rational reflection.
Language itself is the final victim in this threefold
‘purification’. It is for this reason however that
language can constitute the cure for philosophy. Language is the
embodiment of experience and tradition; as long as the ability to
think rests on language, neither ‘reason’ nor
‘philosophy’ can be pure of the empirical, of experience,
and of the experience of the others to whom we relate. It itself, for
Hamann, embodies a relation: it itself is a ‘union of
opposites’, of the aesthetic and the logical, the bodily and the
intellectual; it unites the divisions Kant’s
Critique
creates.
For Hamann, in contrast to Kant, the question is therefore not so much
‘what is reason?’ as ‘what is language?’, as
he writes in a letter. This is the ground of the paralogisms and
antinomies that Kant raises in his Critique. Sharing Hume’s
empiricism and Berkeley’s suspicion of universals and abstract
terms, he concludes: “Hence it happens that one takes
words
for
concepts
, and
concepts
for the
things themselves
” (ZH 5, 264:34–265:1). Language
then has a fundamental role to play in unmasking the
philosopher’s tendency to ‘prosopopoeia’. The
relation of language to reason he certainly did not feel had solved,
however, as he wrote to a friend:
If only I was as eloquent as Demosthenes, I would have to do no more
than repeat a single word three times. Reason is language—Logos;
I gnaw on this marrowbone and will gnaw myself to death over it. It is
still always dark over these depths for me: I am still always awaiting
an apocalyptic angel with a key to this abyss. (ZH 5, 177:16–21)
9. Knowledge
For Hamann, knowledge is inseparable from self-knowledge, and
self-knowledge inseparable from knowledge of the other. We are
visible, as in a mirror, in each other; “God and my neighbor are
therefore a part of my self-knowledge, my self-love” (N I,
302:16–23). He writes in a letter: “Self knowledge begins with
the neighbor, the mirror, and just the same with true self-love; that
goes from the mirror to the matter” (ZH 6, 281:16–17).
Sometimes this exploration of self-knowledge through interpersonal
intimacy takes a sexual form, as in the Sibyl’s Essay on
Marriage (already discussed).
All forms of knowledge, of learning and development even of the most
natural functions, require the help of another. (The ‘Knight of
the Rose Cross’, while jesting with Hume, tells us ironically
that even eating and drinking, and indeed excretion, are not
instinctual or innate but require teaching.) (N III, 28:26–28; N
III, 29:7–10) This is conceived not only in such immediately
interpersonal ways, but also more widely in the context of the
community. The indispensability of ‘the other’ for
knowledge is also the reason that Hamann gives the importance he does
to tradition in the formation of knowledge. “Our reason arises,
at the very least, from this twofold lesson of sensuous revelations
and human testimonies” (N III 29:28–30). Years before
Kant’s first
Critique
, Hamann attempts to relate the
senses and the understanding and their roles in knowledge, using a
characteristically concrete metaphor: the senses are like the stomach,
the understanding like blood vessels. Not only do the blood vessels
need the stomach to receive the nourishment that they distribute; the
stomach also needs the blood vessels to function. This insistence on
the mutual dependency and interrelation of sense experience and
understanding (as opposed to many Enlightenment views that plumped for
either reason or the senses as the dominant party) was refined in his
engagement with Kant’s critique. Throughout his life, he was
neither materialist, purely empiricist or positivist, nor idealist,
rationalist or intellectualist in his epistemology. Rather, he is
firmly against dividing knowledge or ways of knowing into different
kinds. “The philosophers have always given truth a bill of
divorce, by separating what nature has joined together and vice
versa” (N III, 40: 3–5). With Kant’s critique, the
problem becomes still more urgent; Kant’s treatment of the issue
is a “violent, unwarranted, obstinate divorce of what nature has
joined together”. Revising Kant’s metaphor of sensibility
and understanding as two stems of human knowledge, he suggests we see
knowledge as a single stem with two roots. Thus he rejects the
division of what can be known
a priori
from what can be known
a posteriori, and many of the consequences of such a stance. Here
again he reaches for the ‘Principle of the Union of
Opposites’ in his deployment of imagery to suggest a different
approach. The relation of the senses and understanding is a
‘hypostatic union’, a ‘
communicatio
idiomatum
’ (phrases borrowed from Christian theological
discussion of how the two natures of divine and human are united in
Christ). This mysterious union can only be revealed and understood by
‘ordinary language’. (In suggesting that the problems in
philosophy can be cured by attending to ‘ordinary
language’, he clearly anticipates the late Wittgenstein).
In this engagement with Kant, Hamann returns and deepens the lesson he
had learnt much earlier in his reading of Hume: that belief or faith
is an essential precursor for knowledge. Everything is dependent or
grounded on faith; there is no privileged position for any kind or
form of knowledge (a priori, scientific, etc.) In Hamann’s
epistemology, the hard division between ‘knowledge’ and
‘belief’ or ‘faith’ becomes eroded. Both
knowledge and faith rest on a foundation of trust; neither rest on a
foundation of indubitability. “Every philosophy consists of
certain and uncertain knowledge, of idealism and realism, of
sensuousness and deductions. Why should only the uncertain be called
belief? What then are—
rational grounds?
” (ZH 7,
165:33–37) ‘Sensuousness’ translates
Sinnlichkeit
(Kant’s ‘sensibility’). Belief
and reason both need each other; idealism and realism are a fantasized
opposition, of which the authentic use of reason knows nothing. The
unity that lies in the nature of things should lie at the foundation
of all our concepts and reflection (ZH 7, 165:7–17).
10. Interpretation and Understanding
From his ‘debut’ work,
Socratic Memorabilia
,
Hamann began to promulgate a particular view of what it means to
understand something. From the beginning of that essay he emphasized
the importance of passion and commitment in interpretation;
undermining the more conventional assumption that objectivity and
detachment are prerequisites of philosophical reflection and
understanding. In
Aesthetica in Nuce
, wearing the authorial
mask of the ‘kabbalistic philologian’, he provocatively
maintained that initiation into orgies were necessary before the
interpreter could safely begin the hermeneutical act. The idea that
one must rid oneself of presuppositions, prejudices, and predilections
in order to do justice to the subject matter he characterizes as
‘monastic rules’—i.e. an excessive asceticism and
abstinence. He goes so far as to compare such individuals to
self-castrating eunuchs (N II, 207:10–20).
Hamann’s skepticism about neutrality and objectivity does not
make him a ‘subjectivist’, however. The stance and
disposition of the interpreter is integral, helpful, indeed,
indispensable and must be acknowledged; but limitless subjectivity
arouses Hamann’s scorn. Those who ‘flood the text’
with glosses and marginalia, “dreaming up one’s own
inspiration and interpretation,” Hamann likens to the blind
leading the blind (N II, 208:3ff).
The constraints which Hamann places on the interpreter’s
subjectivity are not those usually advocated, therefore: an avoidance
of prejudice and pre-conceptions; an amnesia for one’s own
history, tradition and culture; an obedience to exegetical rules. The
first restraint on subjective distortion is the interpreter’s
own common sense; the last is the reaction of the text itself:
“what are you trying to make of me?” The
interpreter’s freedom is inextricable from the
interpreter’s respect and responsibility, in Hamann’s
view.
The responsible interpreter is conscious of standing within something
larger than oneself: a tradition. The wise interpreter is a kabbalist,
one who interprets an ancient text, and a rhapsodist—the
original meaning of the latter being one who stitches something
together from pre-existing materials. (In Ancient Greece the
‘rhapsodist’ was one who recited poems cobbled together
from prior sources, usually bits of Homer.) In creating
interpretations, the interpreter enjoys the freedom to create anew, as
Hamann created his characteristic prose from pre-existing texts, while
creating a new meaningful piece. Hamann’s use of this genre
itself makes the point: the demand that only one meaning may exist for
a text arises from an impoverished notion of meaning and creativity;
one that misunderstands the nature of composition and the nature of
interpretation alike.
Hamann’s rejected both exegetical ‘materialism’ and
‘idealism’, as he called them — literalism and
excessive flights of fancy. In thus insisting on the integrity of
‘the letter
and
the spirit’, he means to preserve
the place of author, text and reader alike. Both meaning and
interpretation rest in a three-way relationship.
For Hamann, the depth and meaning of a text go beyond the
author’s own contribution, and are the responsibility of the
interpreter: “Few authors understand themselves, and a proper
reader must not only
understand
his author but also be able
to
see beyond him
” (ZH 6, 22:10–12). And yet this
recognition that the author’s opinions and intentions do not
exhaust the possibilities of the text does not annihilate the place of
the author. At the very least, the ‘beyond’ of the text
includes a territory which, if unknown to the author, is not
unrelated: that is, the author’s own unconscious workings and
meanings. It is not accidental that Hamann observes
not
that
few authors understand their own
text,
but that few authors
understand
themselves
. This suggests a picture of creation in
which more of the author is expressed in a text and entrusted to the
interpreter than the author’s conscious intentions and opinions.
This in turn suggests a picture of interpretation—of
“understanding one’s hero” as Hamann put it when
writing about Socrates—in which greater sensitivity, insight,
and fidelity is demanded of the interpreter than would otherwise be
the case. Above all, the interpreter must have the courage to be a
kabbalist; that is, to say more than the text does, not to express
oneself but to say what the author left unsaid. The fruits of such
faithful creativity may be impossible to ‘justify’ or
‘verify’ to the demands of the objectivist, however.
Fundamentally, for Hamann hermeneutics consists in perceiving the
underlying relationship beneath the phenomenon in question; at the
least, of course, the relationship between the author and the
interpreter which requires such fidelity. Given Hamann’s
religious views, this at once introduces a theological dimension.
Ultimately, this means that for Hamann proper hermeneutics rests on
one thing: perceiving God revealed within the phenomenon, whether that
be nature or history (cf.
Socratic Memorabilia
and
Aesthetica in Nuce
for examples). Even the interpretation of
ourselves is a revelation of God; a recognition of whose image solves
all the most complicated knots and riddles of our nature (N II,
206:32–207:2; 198:3–5).
11. Humanity
The topics examined so far all have their anthropological
implications. Hamann’s critique of the socio-political
implications of Kant’s vision of ‘enlightenment’
rests on a conviction about our social and political destiny. Hamann
sees our socio-political vocation as consisting firstly in
‘criticism’ (or ‘critique’)—recognizing
and appropriating, or hating and rejecting, the true vs. the false,
good vs. evil, beautiful vs. ugly; and secondly in
‘politics’, which is increasing or reducing them. This is
not the prerogative of the ruler; every one is at once their own
‘king’, their own ‘legislator’; but also the
‘first-born of their subjects’. It is our
“republican privilege” to contribute to this destiny,
“the critical and magisterial office of a political
animal” (N III, 38–39).
The concepts of knowledge and language and their many facets also
imply a particular anthropology: the diversity yet integration of the
human being. For Hamann, the truest picture of humanity is of
diversity in unity; a number of different, often contrasting aspects
and features together composing the human person. Hamann consequently
did not confine his attention to epistemology and reason when
considering what human beings are, and passion, the thirst for
vengeance, and sexual ecstasy form a part of his picture as well. (In
response to the Enlightenment aesthetic of art as the imitation of
‘beautiful nature’, Hamann’s ironic observation was:
“The thirst for vengeance was the beautiful nature which Homer
imitated” (ZH 2, 157:12).)
The theme of interdependence between human beings, which was
emphasized in his epistemology, also has its roots in his
understanding of what it is to be human. We are not self-sufficient;
but for Hamann, even our lacks and failings have a positive thrust,
this signifier of dependency making us all the more suited for the
enjoyment of nature and one another.
If there is a fundamental key to his thinking on humanity, it is the
idea that the human being is the image of God. This is admittedly more
theological than philosophical, but is essential for understanding
Hamann’s philosophical anthropology. Hamann’s treatment of
this perennial theme is hardly conventional in the history of
Christian thinking. While the experience of sinfulness and wickedness
is a powerful theme, particularly in his earlier, post-conversion
writing, the fundamental thrust of his thinking is the easy exchange
between the human and the divine. In this exchange, language is
“the sign, symbol and pledge of a new, mysterious, inexpressible
but all the more intimate union, participation and community of divine
energies and ideas” (N III, 32:21–24). Despite his
reputation for being an irrationalist, reasoning too relates us to
God; God, nature and reason are described as having the same relation
as light, the eye and what we see, or as author, text and reader (ZH
5, 272:14–16).
One must also remember that Hamann confessed that he could not
conceive of a Creative Spirit without genitalia; indeed, he was quite
happy to assert that the genitals are the unique bond between creature
and Creator. So sexuality in divine-human relations has two aspects.
First, as paradigm of creativity, it is the way in which our
God-likeness can most strikingly be seen. Secondly, as the point of
the most profound unity, it is the locus for our union both with
another human being and with the divine. Provocatively, Hamann sees
original sin and its rebellion as embodied not in sexuality, but in
reason. Overweening reason is our attempt to be like God; meanwhile,
prudery is the rejection of God’s image, while trying to be like
God in the wrong sense (bodilessness). (See Essay of a Sibyl on
Marriage and Konxompax.) One should therefore distinguish
‘likeness to God’ from ‘being equal to God’.
In the Sibyl’s essay, the male version of grasping at equality
with God (cf. Phil. 2:6) is the attempt to be self-sufficient, to be
the God of monotheism: the sole ruler, who possesses self-existence.
Instead, the encounter with the opposite sex should engender in the
man an attitude of profound respect towards the woman’s body, as
the source of his own existence, from his mother. As the source of his
own joy, lovemaking also is an acknowledgement of his own dependence,
his lack of self-sufficiency and autonomy. But this dependence on
another paradoxically is the Godlikeness of the Creator, the father,
the one who humbles himself in self-giving (a favourite Hamannian
theme in his discussion of God). Meanwhile, the woman’s
temptation is to an artificial innocence; a secret envy of God’s
incorporeality and impassibility. The defence of one’s virginity
is another cryptic attempt at self-sufficiency. Instead, the woman
must brave the ‘tongues of fire’ in a ‘sacrifical
offering of innocence’, in order to realize her Godlikeness;
which is not to be found in bodilessness and the absence of passion,
but in passionate creativity; in the willingness to be incarnate.
Thus, if human beings are in the image of God, it is a trinitarian
image of God, a mutual relation of love of ‘Father’,
‘Son’ and ‘Spirit’; found in creating, in
saving, and in tongues of fire.
Bibliography
All translations from Hamann’s works and letters in this entry
are by Gwen Griffith Dickson in works cited below, except for the
translation from the letter to Kraus, which is cited in the
translation by Garrett Green, in James Schmidt (ed.),
What is
Enlightenment?  Eighteenth-Century Answers and Twentieth-Century
Questions
, Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California
Press, 1996.
Hamann’s writings
Hamann’s works, including those unpublished in his lifetime,
were reprinted in a collection edited by Josef Nadler:
Hamann, Johann Georg,
Sämtliche Werken
, edited by Josef
Nadler, 6 volumes, Vienna: Verlag Herder, 1949–1957; reprinted
Wuppertal: Brockhaus, 1999.
Citations from this source, in conformity with common practice for
Hamann references, are given above as: N II, 13:10. This means
“Nadler’s edition, volume two, page thirteen, line
ten.” This same mode of reference also applies to the
translations in Gwen Griffith Dickson (see below), wherein the pages
are laid out in as close an approximation as possible to
Nadler’s edition.
However, Hamann researchers have subsequently established that the
Nadler edition unfortunately is beset by a number of errors. New
editorial activity is underway on Hamann’s writings and on his
letters:
Johann Georg Hamann,
Sokratische Denkwürdigkeiten. Wolken
(Historisch-kritische Ausgabe) [Philosophische Bibliothek: 748],
Leonard Keidel und Janina Reibold (eds.), Hamburg: Meiner, 2021.
Johann Georg Hamann,
Fliegender Brief
(Historisch-kritische
Ausgabe) [Philosophische Bibliothek 707], 2 volumes, Janina Reibold
(ed.), Hamburg: Meiner, 2018.
Hamann’s Letters
Johann Georg Hamann,
Kommentierte Briefausgabe
, 
Leonard Keidel und Janina Reibold (eds.), Heidelberg, 2020,
available online
.
Hamann, Johann Georg,
Briefwechsel
, edited by Walther
Ziesemer and Arthur Henkel (from volume 4 on, edited by Henkel alone).
8 volumes. Wiesbaden/ Frankfurt: Insel Verlag, 1955–1975.
Citations from this source are given as: ZH 4 etc. as above.
Other selections
Johann Georg Hamann,
Schriften zur Sprache. Einleitung und
Anmerkungen von Josef Simon
, Frankfurt a.M.: Suhrkamp Verlag,
1967.
–––,
Eine Auswahl aus seinen Schriften.
Entkleidung und Verklärung
, Hg. von Martin Seils, Wuppertal:
R. Brockhaus Verlag, 1987.
–––,
Vom Magus im Norden und der
Verwegenheit des Geistes. Ausgewählte Schriften
, Hg. von
Stefan Majetschak, Düsseldorf: Parerga Verlag, 1993.
–––,
Ausgewählte Schriften
, Hg.
von Hans Eichner, Berlin: Nicolaische Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1994.
–––,
Ausgewählt, eingeleitet und mit
Anmerkungen versehen von Arthur Henkel
, Frankfurt a.M.: Insel
Verlag, 1988.
Other editions and commentaries, in German
Daphne. Nachdruck der von Johann Georg Hamann, Johann Gotthelf
Lindner u.a. herausgegebenen Königsberger Zeitschrift
(1749–1750)
, mit einem Nachwort von Joseph Kohnen,
Frankfurt a.M.: Peter Lang, 1991. (Regensburger Beiträge zur
deutschen Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft, Reihe A: Quellen,
Bd.5).
Johann Georg Hamann,
Londoner Schriften. Historisch-kritische
Neuedition von Oswald Bayer und Bernd Weißenborn
,
München: C.H. Beck, 1993.
–––,
Sokratische Denkwürdigkeiten.
Aesthetica in nuce
, mit einem Kommentar, hg. von Sven-Aage
Jörgensen, Stuttgart: Reclam Verlag, 1968. (Reclams
Universalbibliothek 926/26a).
–––,
Kleeblatt Hellenistischer Briefe
,
Text mit Wiedergabe des Erstdruckes, hg. und kommentiert von Karlheinz
Löhrer, Frankfurt a.M.: Peter Lang, 1994. (Regensburger
Beiträge zur deutschen Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft. Reihe
A: Bd. 8).
Wild, Reiner, “Metacriticus bonae spei”. Johann Georg
Hamann’s “Fliegender Brief”. Einführung, Text
und Kommentar, Frankfurt a.M.: Peter Lang, 1975. (Regensburger
Beiträge zur deutschen Sprach- und Literaturwissenschaft. Reihe
B: Untersuchungen, Bd. 6).
Bayer, Oswald und Christian Knudsen (Hg.),
Kreuz und
Kritik
, Johann Georg Hamanns Letztes Blatt, Text und
Interpretation, Tübingen: Mohr, 1983.
Blanke, Fritz and Karlfried Gründer,
Johann Georg Hamanns
Hauptschriften Erklärt
, 8 volumes were projected, the
following appeared: Gütersloh: Mohn, 1962f.
I:
Die Hamann-Forschung
, edited by Fritz Blanke and Lothar
Schreiner (1956).
II:
Sokratische Denkwürdigkeiten
, edited by Fritz
Blanke and Karlfried Gründer,
erklärt von
Fritz
Blanke (1959).
IV:
Über den Ursprung der Sprache
, edited by Fritz
Blanke und Karlfried Gründer,
erklärt von
Elfriede
Büchsel (1963).
V:
Mysterienschriften
, edited by Fritz Blanke und
Karlfried Gründer,
erklärt von
Evert Jansen
Schoonhoven and Martin Seils (1962).
VII:
Golgotha und Scheblimini
, edited by Fritz Blanke und
Lothar Schreiner,
erklärt von
Lothar Schreiner
(1956).
Bayer, Oswald,
Vernunft ist Sprache. Hamanns Metakritik
Kants
, Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, 2002.
Manegold, Ingemarie,
Johann Georg Hamanns Schrift
Konxompax
, Heidelberg: Carl Winter Universitätsverlag,
1963.
English translations and commentaries
Dickson, Gwen Griffith [Gwen Griffith-Dickson],
Johann Georg
Hamann’s Relational Metacriticism
, Berlin: de Gruyter,
1995. (
Socratic Memorabilia
,
Aesthetica in Nuce
, a
selection of essays on language, “Essay of a Sibyl on
Marriage,”
Metacritique of the Purism of Reason
)
Haynes, Kenneth,
Hamann: Writings on Philosophy and
Language
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. [Includes
Socratic Memorabilia
(excerpt),
Essay on An Academic
Question
,
Miscellaneous Notes on Word Order
,
Cloverleaf of Hellenistic Letters
,
Aesthetica in
Nuce
,
The Last Will and Testament of the Knight of the
Rose-Cross
,
Philological Ideas and Doubts
,
To the
Solomon of Prussia
,
New Apology of the letter h
,
Golgotha and Sheblimini
,
Metacritique of the Purism of
Reason
, and
Disrobing and Transfiguration
(excerpt).]
Kleinig, John,
London Writings: The Spiritual &
Theological Journal of Johann Georg Hamann
, Evansville: Ballast
Press, 2021.
Nisbet, H. B. (ed.),
German Aesthetic and Literary Criticism:
Winckelmann, Lessing, Hamann, Herder, Schiller, Goethe
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985. [Includes
Aesthetica
in Nuce
, translated by Joyce Crick.]
O’Flaherty, James,
Hamann’s Socratic Memorabilia.
A Translation and a Commentary
, Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins
Press, 1967. [
SM
] (Socratic Memorabilia)
Schmidt, James (ed.),
What is Enlightenment?
Eighteenth-Century Answers and Twentieth-Century Questions
,
Berkeley and Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1996.
(“Letter to Kraus,” translated by Garrett Green and
Metacritique of the Purism of Reason
, translated by Kenneth
Haynes)
Smith, Ronald Gregor,
J.G. Hamann, 1730–1788. A Study in
Christian Existence. With Selections from his Writings
, London:
Collins, 1960. (A selection of short passages)
Monographs and Studies in English
Alexander, W.M., 1966,
Johann Georg Hamann. Philosophy and
Faith
, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Anderson, Lisa Marie (ed.) (trans.), 2008,
Hegel on
Hamann
, Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University Press.
Assaiante, Julia Goesser, 2011,
Body Language. Corporeality,
Subjectivity and Language in Johann Georg Hamann
, New York: Peter
Lang.
Bayer, Oswald, 2012,
A Contemporary in Dissent
, Grand
Rapids: Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Company.
Beech, Timothy, 2010,
Hamann’s prophetic mission. A
genetic study of three late works against the Enlightenment
,
London: Maney Publ.
Beetz, Manfred (ed.), 2012,
Johann Georg Hamann. Religion und
Gesellschaft
, Berlin: De Gruyter.
Beiser, Frederick C., 1987,
The Fate of Reason. German
Philosophy from Kant to Fichte
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Berlin, Isaiah, 1993,
The Magus of the North. J. G. Hamann and
the Origins of Modern Irrationalism
, Henry Hardy (ed.).
London: John Murray.
Betz, John Renner, 1999,
Hamann before Postmodernity
,
Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Theology, University of
Virginia.
Betz, John R., 2009,
After Enlightenment: The Post-Secular
Vision of J. G. Hamann
, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Brose, Thomas, 2004,
Johann Georg Hamann und David Hume
,
Frankfurt am Main [u.a.]: Lang, Peter Frankfurt.
Dahlstrom, Daniel, 2000, “The Aesthetic Holism of Hamann,
Herder and Schiller”, in Karl Ameriks (ed.)
The Cambridge
Companion to German Idealism
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Dickson, Gwen Griffith [Gwen Griffith-Dickson], 1995,
Johann
Georg Hamann’s Relational Metacriticism
, Berlin: de
Gruyter.
Dunning, Stephen, 1979,
The Tongues of Men: Hegel and Hamann
on Religious Language and History
, Missoula: Scholars Press.
German, Terence J., 1981,
Hamann on Language and
Religion
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Jacobs, Brian, 1996, “Self-insurrence, incapacity and guilt:
Kant and Hamann on Enlightment guardianship” (with an attached
translation of Hamanns Letter to J. C. Kraus), in
Lessing Yearbook
28
, Detroit: Wayne State University Press, pp. 147–162
Leibrecht, Walter, 1966,
God and Man in the Thought of
Hamann
, Translated by James H. Stam and Martin H. Bertram.
Philadelphia: Fortress Press.
Locker, Markus-Ekkehard, 2003,
Hamann — Wittgenstein:
Towards Pre-Critical Biblical Hermeneutics
, in
The Loyola
Schools Review
(School of Humanities II), Loyola Schools of the
Ateneo de Manila University: Office of Research and Publications, pp.
17–40.
Lowrie, Walter, 1950,
Johann Georg Hamann, an
Existentialist
, Princeton: Princeton Theological Seminary.
McCumber, John, 1997, “Hegel and Hamann. Ideas and
Life”, in
Hegel and the Tradition. Essays in honour of H.S
Harris
, v. M. Baur (ed.). Toronto: University of Toronto
Press.
O’Flaherty, James C., 1952,
Unity and Language: A Study
in the Philosophy of Johann Georg Hamann
, Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press.
–––, 1967,
Hamann’s Socratic
Memorabilia. A Translation and a Commentary
, Baltimore: The Johns
Hopkins Press.
–––, 1979,
Johann Georg Hamann
, Boston:
Twayne Publishers.
–––, 1988,
The Quarrel of Reason with
Itself. Essays on Hamann, Michaelis, Lessing, Nietzsche
,
Columbia: Camden House.
–––, 1997, “Petito principi minima as a
leitmotif of the Enlightment according Hamann”, in
Neue
Zeitschrift für Systematische Theologie
, 39/3:
233–248.
Richards, Kirby Don, 1999,
Johann Georg Hamanns Apocalyptic
Rhetoric
, Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Theology, University
of Virginia.
Rudolph, Andre, 2006,
Figuren der Ähnlichkeit Johann
Georg Hamanns Analogiedenken im Kontext des 18. Jahrhunderts
,
Tübingen: Niemeyer.
Ruin, Hans, 1999, “Heidegger and Benjamin on language. Truth
and translation”, in
Research in Phenomenology
, 29:
141–160.
Sparling, Robert, 2008,
Johann Georg Hamann and the
Enlightenment Project
, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Strässle, Thomas, 2004, “The Religious Symbolism of
Salt and the Critisism of Rationality in Johann Georg Hamann”,
in
Neue Zeitschrift für Systematische Theologie
, 46:
101–111.
Vaughan, Larry, 1989,
Johann Georg Hamann: Metaphysics of
Language and Vision of History
, (American University Studies.
Series I. Germanic Languages and Literatur. Volume 60.) Frankfurt
a.M.: Peter Lang.
Literature reviews
Büchsel, Elfriede. “Geschärfte Aufmerksamkeit
– Hamannliteratur seit 1972.” In:
Deutsche
Vierteljahrsschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und
Geistesgeschichte
, 60. Jg., H.3, 1986, S.375–425.
Büchsel, Elfriede. “Weitgefächertes
Interess.” Hamannliteratur 1986–1995. In:
Deutsche
Vierteljahrsschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und
Geistesgeschichte
, 71. Jg., H.2, 1997, S.288–356.
The International Hamann-Colloquium
The International Hamann-Colloquium meets every few years. Collections
of its papers are some of the most important contributions to Hamann
scholarship:
Johann Georg Hamann
, (Acta des Internationalen
Hamann-Colloquiums in Luneberg 1976), ed. by Bernhard Gajek. Frankfurt
am Main: Vittorio Klostermann, 1979.
Johann Georg Hamann
, (Acta des zweiten Internationalen
Hamann-Colloquiums im Herder-Institut zu Marburg/Lahn 1980), ed. by
Bernhard Gajek. Marburg: N. G. Elwert Verlag: 1983.
Johann Georg Hamann und Frankreich
, (Acta des dritten
Internationalen Hamann-Colloquiums im Herder-Institut zu Marburg/Lahn
1982), ed. by Bernhard Gajek. Marburg: Elwert Verlag, 1987.
Hamann — Kant — Herder
, (Acta des vierten
Internationalen Hamann-Kolloquiums im Herder-Institut zu Marburg/Lahn
1985), ed. by Bernhard Gajek, Frankfurt a.M.: Peter Lang 1987.
Johann Georg Hamann und die Krise der Aufklärung
,
(Acta des fünften Internationalen Hamann-Kolloquiums im
Münster i.W. 1988), ed. by Bernhard Gajek, Frankfurt a.M.: Peter
Lang 1990.
Johann Georg Hamann: Autor und Autorschaft
, (Acta des
sechsten Internationalen Hamann-Kolloquiums im Herder-Institut zu
Marburg/Lahn 1992), ed. by Bernhard Gajek. Frankfurt a.M.: Peter Lang
1996.
Johann Georg Hamann und England: Hamann und die
englischsprachige Aufklärung
, Acta des Siebten
Internationalen Hamann-Kolloquiums zu Marburg/Lahn 1996), ed. by
Bernhard Gajek, Frankfurt am Main (u.a.): Lang, 1999.
Die Gegenwärtigkeit: Johann Georg Hamanns
, (Acta des
Achten Internationalen Hamann-Kolloquiums an der
Martin-Luther-Universität Halle-Wittenberg 2002), ed. by Bernhard
Gajek; Peter Lang, 2005.
Secondary Sources
Altenhöner, Ingrid, 1997,
Die Sibylle als literarische
Chiffre bei Johann Georg Hamann — Friedrich Schlegel —
Johann Wolfgang Goethe
, (Europäische Hochschulschriften.
Reihe 1, Deutsche Sprache und Literatur, Bd. 1646). Frankfurt a.M:
Peter Lang 1997.
Anderson, Lisa Marie (ed.), 2012,
Hamann and the
Tradition
, Evanston (Illinois): Northwestern University
Press.
Bayer, Oswald, 1988,
Zeitgenosse im Widerspruch. Johann Georg
Hamann als radikaler Aufklärer
, (Serie Piper 918.)
München: Piper.
Bayer, Oswald, 1998,
Johann Georg Hamann: Der hellste Kopf
seiner Zeit
, Tübingen: Attempo.
Cloeren, Hermann J., 1988, “Language and Thought”, in
Hermann Cloeren (ed.),
German Approaches to Analytic philosophy in
the 18th and 19th Centuries
, Berlin and New York: Walter de
Gruyter, pp. 21–26.
Dahlstrom, Daniel, 2000, “The Aesthetic Holism of Hamann,
Herder and Schiller”, in Karl Ameriks (ed.),
The Cambridge
Companion to German Idealism.
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Fischer, Rainer, 1996,
Die Kunst des Bibellesens. Theologische
Ästhetik am Beispiel des Schriftverständnisses
,
(Beiträge zur theologischen Urteilsbildung, Bd. 1.) Frankfurt
a.M.: Peter Lang.
Fritsch, Friedemann, 1998, “Wirklichkeit als göttlich
und menschlich zugleich. Überlegungen zur Verallgemeinerung einer
christologischen Bestimmung in Hamanns Denken”, in Oswald Bayer
(ed.),
Der hellste Kopf seiner Zeit
, Tübingen: Attempo,
pp. 52–79
Goethe, Johann,
Sämtliche Werke nach Epochen seines
Schaffens, Münchener Ausgabe
, edited by Gerhard Sauder. 21
volumes. München: Carl Hanser Verlag, 1985–1991.
Goldstein, Jürgen, 2010, “Die Höllenfahrt der
Selbsterkenntnis und der Weg zur Vergötterung bei Hamann und
Kant”, in
Kant-Studien: Philosophische Zeitschrift
,
101(2): 189–216.
Hamilton, John, 2014, “
Repetitio Sententiarum, Repetitio
Verborum
: Kant, Hamann, and the Implications of Citation”,
The German Quarterly
, 87(3): 297–312.
Hegel, G. W. F., “Über Hamanns Schriften”, in
Sämtliche Werke
, edited by Hermann Glockner, vol. 20.
Stuttgart: Frommann Verlag, 1928 [1958].
Hoffmann, Volker, 1972,
Johann Georg Hamanns Philologie:
Hamanns Philologie zwischen enzyklopädischer Mikrologie und
Hermeneutik
, Stuttgart (u.a.): Kohlhammer.
Inghilleri, Moira, 2000, “Intersubjectivity: the Holy Grail
of Mutual Understanding?”
Language and Communication
,
20: 133–148.
Jorgensen, Sven-Aage, 1968,
J. G. Hamann: Sokratische
Denkwuerdigkeitn. Aesthetica in Nuce.
, Stuttgart: Reclam.
–––, 1976,
Johann Georg Hamann
,
Stuttgart, 1976.
–––, 2013,
Querdenker der Aufklaerung.
Studien zu Johann Georg Hamann.
Goettingen:m Wallstein
Verlang.
Kleffmann, Tom, 1994,
Die Erbsündenlehre in
sprachtheologischem Horizont: eine Interpretation Augustins, Luthers
und Hamanns
, Tübingen: Mohr.
Lestition, Steven O., 2007, “Countering, Transposing, or
Negating the Enlightenment? A Response to Robert Norton,”
Journal of History of Ideas
68, no. 4: 659–82.
Loncar, Samuel, 2008, “Transcendental Idealism and the
German Counter-Enlightenment: The Historical and Philosophical
Significance of Hamann’s and Jacobi’s Criticisms of
Kant”,
Dialogue: Journal of Phi Sigma Tau
51, no. 1:
1–10.
Merlan, Philip, 1951, “From Hume to Hamann”,
The
Personalist
321: 11–18.
–––, 1948, “‘Parva
Hamanniana’: J. G. Hamann as Spokesman of the Middle
Class”,
Journal of the History of Ideas
, 9:
380–384.
–––, 1949, “‘Parva
Hamannianad’ (II) : Hamann and Schmohl”,
Journal of
the History of Ideas
, 10: 567–574.
–––, 1950, “‘Parva
Hamanniana’: Hamann and Galiani”,
Journal of the
History of Ideas
, 11: 486–489.
Nadler, Josef, 1949,
Johann Georg Hamann. Der Zeuge des Corpus
mysticum
, Salzburg: Otto Müller.
Nebel, Gerhard, 1973,
Hamann
, Stuttgart: E. Klett.
Norton, Robert Edward, 2007, “The Myth of
Counter-Enlightenment”,
Journal of History of Ideas
68,
no. 4: 635–58.
Piske, Irmgard, 1989,
Offenbarung, Sprache, Vernunft. Zur
Auseinandersetzung Hamanns mit Kant
, Frankfurt am Main:
Regensburg.
Redmond, M., 1987, “The Hamann-Hume Connection”,
Religious Studies
, 23: 95–107.
Regier, Alexander, 2010,
Fracture and Fragmentation in British
Romanticism
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 2016, “Johann Georg Hamann:
Metacritique and Poesis in Counter-Enlightenment”, in
The
Oxford Handbook of European Romanticism
, Paul Hamilton (ed.),
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2016, “Anglo-German Connections in
William Blake, Johann Georg Hamann, and the Moravians”,
SEL
Studies in English Literature 1500–1900
, 56(4):
757–776.
Ringleben, Joachim, 2006, “Søren Kierkegaard as a
Reader of Hamann”, in
Kierkegaard Studies: Yearbook
2006, ed. Niels Jørgen Cappelørn, Hermann Deuser, and K.
Brian Söderquist, Berlin: De Gruyter.
Rorty, Richard, 1979,
Philosophy and the Mirror of
Nature
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Salmony, H.A., 1958,
Johann Georg Hamanns metakritische
Philosophie
(Erster Band: Einführung in die metakritische
Philosophie J. G. Hamanns), Zollikon: Evangelischer Verlag.
Schulte, Susanne (ed.), 2011,
Ohne Wort keine Vernunft –
keine Welt bestimmt Sprache Denken? Schriftsteller und Wissenschftler
im Wortwechsel mit Johann Georg Hamann
, Münster [u.a.]:
Waxmann.
Seils, Martin, 1957,
Theologische Aspekte zur
gegenwärtigen Hamann-Deutung
, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck
& Ruprecht.
Swain, Charles W., 1967, “Hamann and the Philosophy of
Hume”,
Journal of the History of Philosophy
, 5
(October): 343–351.
Tereyakis, Katie, 2007,
The Immanent Word: The Turn to
Language in German Philosophy 1759–1801
, New York:
Routledge.
Thouard, Denis, 2006, “Hamann and the History of
Philosophy”, in
History of Scholarship
, ed. C. R.
Ligota and J.-L. Quantin, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Unger, Rudolf, 1963,
Hamann und die Aufklärung. Studien
zur Vorgeschichte des romantischen Geistes im 18. Jahrhundert
,
(Bd.1: Text. Bd. 2: Anmerkungen und Beilagen. 2. Aufl. Halle an der
Saale: Max Niemeyer 1925.) Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche
Buchgesellschaft.
Weishoff, Axel, 1998,
Wider den Purismus der Vernunft. J.G.
Hamanns sakralrhetorischer Ansatz zu einer Metakritik des Kantischen
Kritizismus
, Wiesbaden: Westdeutscher Verlag.
Wessel, Leonard P., 1969, “Hamann’s Philosophy of
Aesthetics: its meaning for the Storm & Stress Period”,
Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism
, 27 (Summer):
433–443.
Wohlfart, Günter, 1984,
Denken der Sprache: Sprache und
Kunst bei Vico, Hamann, Humboldt und Hegel
, Freiburg (u.a.):
Alber.
Wühr, Paul, 1995,
Ob der Magus in Norden.
Selbstgespräch eines Autors mit Johann Georg Hamann
,
München: Renner.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Internationales Hamann-Kolloquium
.
 The International Hamann Colloquium website, under the directorship
of Professor Bernhard Gajek, contains bibliography and information
about the colloquium meetings and publications.
Related Entries
Berkeley, George
|
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich
|
Herder, Johann Gottfried von
|
Hume, David
|
Jacobi, Friedrich Heinrich
|
Kant, Immanuel
|
Kierkegaard, Søren
|
Rorty, Richard