Lady Damaris Masham
First published Tue Jan 14, 2003; substantive revision Wed Nov 25, 2020
Damaris Masham (1658–1708) was one of the earliest English woman
philosophers. The main sources for her philosophy are two anonymously
published books,
A Discourse Concerning the Love of God
(1696) and
Occasional Thoughts in Reference to a Vertuous and
Christian Life
(1705), and her correspondence with Locke and with
Leibniz.
1. Life
2.
A Discourse Concerning the Love of God
3.
Occasional Thoughts
4. Correspondence
Bibliography
Sources
Studies
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Life
Damaris Masham was born in 1658, the daughter of the Cambridge
Platonist, Ralph Cudworth, who was Master of Christ’s College,
Cambridge. Little is known of her education, but she did have the
advantage of being born into a family with a considerable library.
However, despite the fact that her father was one of the most learned
men of his generation he did not teach her Latin or Greek. She did
apparently learn French as was deemed requisite for a gentlewoman of
the time, and she taught herself Latin, later in life, according to
the method recommended in Locke’s
Some Thoughts Concerning
Education
.
As a young woman, Damaris Cudworth (as she then was) was able to
escape ‘the learned dullness’ of Cambridge by visiting London
where she frequented the more stimulating environment of the circle of
Elizabeth Stillingfleet, whom she nicknamed ‘Urgunda’ in her
letters. Elizabeth Stillingfeet was the second wife of Edward
Stillingfleet, future Bishop of Worcester, who later engaged in
controversy with Locke. It was probably here, that she met her
husband, Sir Francis Masham, who was a relative of Elizabeth
Stillingfleet.
It was also in London, sometime before 1682, that she met John Locke,
probably through their mutual friend, Edward Clarke. By all accounts
Locke held her in high esteem as a philosophical mind, and she was to
be one of the earliest proponents of his philosophy. Their
acquaintance, at least in the early stages, was more than merely an
intellectual friendship. Among their earliest letters is a series of
pastoral love poems, conducted under the
noms de plume
,
Philoclea and Philander. They continued to correspond on a variety of
philosophical subjects during Locke’s years in Holland. On his
return in 1688, he became guest and later permanent resident at her
home at Oates in Essex.
Her interest in philosophy was nurtured by her reading of the
Cambridge Platonists (Ralph Cudworth, Henry More and John Smith), with
whose works she was familiar by the time she met Locke. It was her
good fortune to make his acquaintance, since he certainly encouraged
her interest in philosophy. Thus, unlike most women of her time,
Damaris Cudworth had the relative advantages of a family and a
friendship that enabled her to develop her philosophical interests. On
the other hand, her marriage in 1685, to Sir Francis Masham, an Essex
squire and widower with nine children, was hardly one that enhanced
her opportunities to pursue philosophy. She had one son, Francis Cudworth
Masham. Damaris Masham’s philosophical writings constitute only
a small part of her philosophical activity. Her surviving
correspondence, especially with Locke and with Leibniz show that her
interest in philosophy went far beyond what she published. Her two
books,
A Discourse Concerning the Love of God
(1696) and
Occasional Thoughts in Reference to a Vertuous or Christian
Life
(1705), were printed anonymously, and with encouragement
from Locke. She also wrote a biography of Locke which is the source of
the first printed biographies of Locke.
On the little evidence available it is impossible to establish her
early philosophical views with any certainty. Her published writings
contain clear echoes of Locke, which led to their being attributed by
some to Locke. Nonetheless her Cambridge Platonist background remains
evident, especially in the religious and ethical views which connect
both her books which are both concerned with practical ethics. While
these show that she became closer to Locke in epistemology, on ethics,
she is closer to Cudworth, especially with regard to moral
accountability, her acceptance that moral principles exist
independently as part of the nature of things, and her
anti-voluntarism. In fact her receptivity to Locke may be attributed
to her Cambridge Platonist background, reflecting the fact that there
is more common ground between Locke and the Cambridge Platonists than
is normally assumed. Areas where she is most in agreement with Locke
entail no sacrifice of Cudworthian principles, in particular her
holding that morality is founded in reason and the freedom to act,
that that the end of ethics is human happiness, and that the exercise
of virtue requires a right disposition of mind. Like both Locke and
the Cambridge Platonists she was a strong advocate of religious
toleration.
2.
A Discourse Concerning the Love of God
Notwithstanding their religious-sounding titles, both of Damaris
Masham’s books address philosophical issues which were topical
at the time: love, happiness and moral virtue. In both she offers an
optimistic view of human beings as rational and social creatures
motivated by the love of happiness. This “earliest and strongest
principle,” consists of the enjoyment of pleasure achieved
through the regulatory exercise of reason, which directs us to the
greatest happiness.
A Discourse Concerning the Love of God
(1696) was written in
explicit critique of John Norris, the most important English proponent
of the philosophy of Nicholas Malebranche. Norris had, in 1690,
attacked Locke in
Cursory Reflections upon a Book Call’d
Essay Concerning Human Understanding
. This may in part explain
Masham’s hostility to Norris, in spite of the fact that she was
dedicatee of another book by him:
Reflections on the Conduct of
Human Life
(London, 1690). However, the immediate context for
A Discourse
was the debate about the nature of love, which
was a theme in Norris’s writings, especially his
Practical
Discourses
(1691, to which she makes direct reference), and his
correspondence with Mary Astell published as
Letters Concerning
the Love of God
(1695). Lady Masham’s critique of Norris
and Astell is also aimed, indirectly, at Nicolas Malebranche. Further
in the background to it was the so-called
Querelle du
Quietisme
, the debate on
amour pur
[pure love] between
Malebranche, François de Fénelon and
Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet which was sparked by the mystical
writings of Madame Guyon.
Norris had taken an occasionalist position, maintaining that God is
the immediate cause of pleasure for us and is therefore the sole and
proper object of our love. Creatures are therefore merely the
occasional causes of pleasing effects in us, and our love of creatures
is inferior and secondary to our love of God. Accordingly he
distinguishes two kinds of love: love of God or benevolence and love
of creatures or concupiscence, claiming that desire only pertains to
the love of God. In response Lady Masham denies Norris’s
distinction between love of God and love of creatures, insisting that
desire pertains to our love of created things. She argues that our
love of God comes not from a divinely instilled idea of God in our
minds, but from observing the world around us, whence we conclude,
rationally, that we owe love to its creator, God. Her fundamental
objection to Norris’s occasionalism is that it undermines the
basis of morality because, by denigrating God’s works, it
destroys the bonds of human society and the very basis of Christian
morality. In opposition to Norris, Lady Masham emphasises the
importance of practical morality, arguing that it is integral to
religious conduct.
Her affinity with Locke is most apparent in her epistemology. For
instance she argues that we derive our knowledge of God by comparing
ideas “received from Sense and Reflection” and that the
idea of God is “a Proposition containing many complex Ideas in
it; and which we are not capable of framing till we have been long
acquainted with pleasing Sensations” (
A Discourse
, p.
66). She also defines love in a Lockean manner as
“complaisance”. A French translation of
A
Discourse
by Pierre Coste was published in Amsterdam in 1705, and
reviewed in Jean Le Clerc’s
Bibliotheque Choisie
in the
same year.
3.
Occasional Thoughts
Occasional Thoughts in Reference to a Vertuous or Christian
Life
(1705) develops Lady Masham’s views on practical
morality that she had set out in
A Discourse
. The book is
also, in part, an answer to Mary Astell’s
The Christian
Religion as Professed by a Daughter of the Church
which was
published as a reply to
A Discourse Concerning the Love of
God
. In a discussion of the role of reason in religious matters
and the relationship between religion and virtuous conduct, Lady
Masham sets out to defend reasonable Christianity from Deism on the
one hand and superstition on the other. Against the Deists, Masham
insists on the importance of revelation and faith and denies that
natural religion based purely on reason is possible. On the other hand
religious belief that ignores the role of reason in religion is mere
superstition and will result in bigotry and atheism, because “an
Irrational Religion can never Rationally be conceived to come from
God” (
Occasional Thoughts
, p. 36). (In Masham’s
view, Roman Catholicism, with its stress on the externals of religion
is largely superstition). For her part, Lady Masham emphasises the
moral aspect of religion, its practical application, rather than
doctrinal content. She shares Locke’s view that virtuous living
is more important than religious ceremonial. Like Locke in the
Epistola de tolerantia
, she argues that moral conduct is
central to religious practice. Accordingly she argues that morality
and religion should not be separated in religious instruction.
Furthermore, civil and religious liberties are necessary for the
exercise of virtue.
In developing her arguments about practical morality she argues that
the exercise of virtue is grounded in civil and religious liberty.
“Freedom or Liberty of action”, she insists, is “the
greatest endowment that a Created Being is capable of
heeding”(
Occasional Thoughts
, pp. 68–78). Education is
the key means to inculcate virtue. And virtue is to be learned not
through precept but by developing a rational understanding of moral
principles. Lack of education and poor education are destructive
socially, morally and spiritually, a point which she develops into a
feminist argument for the education of women. This centres on the
traditional role of mothers in the moral education of their children.
Highly critical of the limited and distorted education which girls
receive, she argues that a mother cannot give her children a
meaningful moral education if she herself is denied education.
4. Correspondence
Damaris Masham’s correspondence is important for the insight it
gives into her philosophical interests. It is not a perfect source, as
it is far from complete. She herself preferred what she called
“rationall conversation” as a medium for philosophical
discussion. After Locke’s arrival at Oates, she was able to
engage in person with visitors from Locke’s otherwise male
social world of friends and associates, such as his nephew Peter King,
Anthony Collins, John Shute (later Viscount Barrington), Francis
Mercury van Helmont, Samuel Bolde, Lord Shaftesbury, Lord Peterborough
and Isaac Newton. Among these, Pierre Coste was engaged as tutor to
her son.  Prior to this, letter-writing enabled her to engage with
others beyond her domestic environment. Letters also mitigated her
isolation from company at Oates after her marriage. Subsequently, the
review of her
Discourse
in Jean Le
Clerc’s
Bibliotheque Choisie
, was confirmation that she
acquired a place of sorts in the international intellectual network
known as the ‘Republic of Letters’, which was centred on
Huguenot diaspora in the Netherlands. Her international correspondents
from this network besides Jean Le Clerc included Philip van Limborch
and Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz.
Damaris Masham’s extant correspondence indicates a lively interest
in a range of topics, such as friendship and religious toleration. The
most philosophically important letters were those she exchanged with
Locke and Leibniz.
The correspondence with Locke, conducted between 1682 and Locke’s
taking up residence at Oates, is the largest extant group of letters
(some 45 letters survive). Most of Locke’s letters to her have
been lost and many of the letters are of a personal nature. But themes
include proof of the existence of God and the role of reason in
matters of religion. Early on she defends the epistemology of the
Cambridge Platonist, John Smith, arguing that there is a
supra-rational/elevated form of knowledge accessible by a
‘Higher Principle’ than reason, which may nonetheless be
activated with the help of reason. Locke however, dismissed this as a
form of ‘Enthusiasm’. Later she commented on the Epitome of
Locke’s
Essay
which he sent her in 1688.
Between 1704 and 1705–6, Lady Masham corresponded with Leibniz, at his
instigation, perhaps because he hoped thereby, to have contact with
Locke. This gave her the opportunity to discuss Leibniz’s philosophy
with him, and for Leibniz to discuss the philosophy of her father,
Ralph Cudworth. Lady Masham knew Leibniz’s philosophy only
indirectly from the
Journal des Sçavans
of 1695, and
Bayle’s article “Rorarius” in the first edition of
his
Dictionnaire
. She takes issue with Leibniz on a number of
points, including his theory of pre-established harmony, the nature of
substance and free will.
Her correspondence with Jean Le Clerc gives some insight into her
views on religious toleration. It also includes her defence of her
father’s
True Intellectual System of the Universe
against the critique of Cudworth by Pierre Bayle, a controversy which
was conducted by proxy through Jean Le Clerc. This is revealing in a
number of ways. It shows she was willing to disagree with Cudworth (e.g., on
the question of whether there could be such a thing as unextended
substance), whilst retaining her respect for him and being prepared to
defend him against his detractors (in this case Pierre Bayle). It also
indicates that she had not abandoned all the Platonist tenets to which
she subscribed before she met Locke.
Bibliography
Sources
Astell, Mary, 1705,
The Christian Religion as Professed by a
Daughter of the Church
, London: R. Wilkin.
Ballard, George, 1752,
Memoirs of Several Ladies of Great
Britain, who have been celebrated for their writings or skill in the
learned languages, arts, and sciences
, Oxford: W. Jackson,
pp. 379–388.
Bayle, Pierre, 1697, “Rorarius”, in
Dictionnaire
Historique et Critique
, Amsterdam: Reinier Leers, vol. 2, part 2,
955–967.
Bibliothèque choisie, pour servir de suite à la
Bibliothèque universelle
, Jean Le Clerc (ed.), Amsterdam:
Henry Schelte.
Broad, Jacqueline (ed.), 2020, “Damaris Cudworth Masham
(1659–1708)”, in
Women Philosophers of
Seventeenth-Century England. Selected Correspondence
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 114–228.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780190673321.003.0004
Cudworth, Ralph, 1678,
True Intellectual System of the
Universe. The first part wherein all the reason and philosophy of
atheism is confuted and its impossibility demonstrated
, London:
Richard Royston.
Le Clerc, Jean, 1705, “Eloge de feu Mr. Locke”, in
his
Bibliothèque choisie
, 6: 342–411; for a
shortened version of this, see the entry “Locke (Jean)” in
the 1728 edition of
Le Grand Dictionnaire Historique
(
nouvelle edition
), started by Louis Moréri, Paris,
vol. 3, s.v.; in the 1759 edition this is volume 6,
pp. 351–353.
Leibniz, G.W., 1875–90,
Die Philosophischen Schriften
von Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
, 7 volumes, C. I. Gerhardt (ed.),
Volumes 3, 372, Berlin. (Letters to Leibniz)
Locke, John, 1689,
Epistola de tolerantia
(A Letter
Concerning Toleration), English version, London: Awnsham Churchill,
1689.
–––, 1693,
Some Thoughts Concerning
Education
, London: A. and J. Churchill.
–––, 1976–1989,
The Correspondence of
John Locke
, E.S. de Beer (ed.), 8 volumes, Oxford: Clarendon
Press. (Correspondence with Locke)
Masham, Damaris, 1696 [1705],
A Discourse Concerning the Love
of God
, London: Awsnsham and John Churchill, 1696. French
translation,
Discours sur l’Amour Divin
, Pierre Coste
(trans.), Amsterdam: Pierre de Coup, 1705.
–––, 1705 [1747],
Occasional Thoughts in
Reference to a Vertuous or Christian Life
, London: A. and
J. Churchil, 1705. Second printing, misattributed to Locke, with
title,
Thoughts on a Christian Life
, London, T. Waller,
1747.
–––, 2004,
The Philosophical Works of
Damaris, Lady Masham
. Introduction by James
G. Buickerood. Bristol: Thoemmes Press.
–––, ms, Three letters to Philip van Limborch,
Amsterdam University Library, MS M31c.
–––, ms, Letters to Shaftesbury, London, Public
Record Office, PRO 30/24/20, fols. 266–7 &
273–4.
–––, ms, Memoir of Locke, Amsterdam University
Library, Remonstrants MSS J. 57a.  Forms the basis of Jean Le
Clerc’s “Eloge de feu Mr. Locke” (1705).
Norris, John, 1690,
Cursory Reflections upon a Book
Call’d Essay Concerning Human Understanding
, London:
S. Manship.
–––, 1690,
Reflections on the Conduct of
Human Life, in a letter to the excellent lady, the Lady Masham
,
London: S. Manship.
–––, 1691,
Practical Discourses Upon Several
Divine Subjects
, London: Samuel Manship.
Norris, John and Mary Astell, 1695,
Letters Concerning the
Love of God
, London: Samuel Manship and Richard Wilkin.
Studies
Acworth, Richard, 2006, “Cursory Reflections upon an Article
Entitled ‘What is it with Damaris, Lady Masham?’”,
Locke Studies
, 6: 189–197.
Broad, Jacqueline, 2002,
Women Philosophers of the Seventeenth
Century
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Chapter 5.
–––, 2003, “Adversaries or Allies? Occasional
Thoughts on the Masham-Astell Exchange”,
Eighteenth Century
Thought
, 1: 123–49.
–––, 2006, “A Woman’s Influence? John
Locke and Damaris Masham on Moral Accountability”,
Journal
of the History of Ideas
, 67: 489–510.
–––, 2019, “Damaris Masham on Women and
Liberty of Conscience”, in
A Feminist History of
Philosophy
, Eileen O’Neill and Mary Lascano (eds.),
Dordrecht: Springer, 319–36.
Buickerood, James G., 2005. “What Is it With Damaris, Lady
Masham? The Historiography of One Early Modern Woman
Philosopherspecial-character”,
Locke Studies
, 5:
179–214.
Frankel, Lois, 1989, “Damaris Cudworth Masham, a
Seventeenth-Century Feminist Philosopher”,
Hypatia
,
4: 80–90.
–––, 1991, “Damaris Cudworth Masham”,
in
A History of Women Philosophers: Modern Women Philosophers,
1600–1900
(Volume 3), Mary Ellen Waithe (ed.), 
Dordrecht, Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 73–85.
Goldie, Mark, 2004,
John Locke and the Mashams at Oates
,
Churchill College: University of Cambridge.
Hammou, Philippe, 2008, “Enthousiasme et nature humaine:
à propos d’une lettre de Locke à Damaris
Cudworth”,
Revue de Métaphysique et Morale
, 3:
337–350.
Hutton, Sarah, 1993, “Damaris Cudworth, Lady Masham: between
Platonism and Enlightenment”,
British Journal for the
History of Philosophy
, 1: 29–54.
–––, 2010, “Damaris Masham”,
The
Continuum Companion to Locke
, P. Schuurman and S.-J. Savonius
Wroth (eds.), London & New York: Continuum, pp. 72–6.
–––, 2012, “Religion, Philosophy and Women’s
Letters: Anne Conway and Damaris Masham”,
Debating the Faith
Religion and Letter-Writing in Great Britain, 1550-1800
, Anne
Dunan-Page and Clotilde Prunier (eds.), Dordrecht: Springer.
–––, 2014, “Religion and Sociability in the
Correspondence of Damaris Masham (1658–1708)”, in
Women and
Religion
, Sarah Apetrei and Hannah Smith (eds.), Farnham: Ashgate,
117–30.
–––, 2018, “Liberty of Mind: Women
Philosophers and the Freedom to Philosophize”, in
Women and
Liberty, 1600–1800 Philosophical Essays
, Jacqueline
Broad and Karen Detlefsen (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press,
123–37.
Lascano, Marcy B., 2011, “Damaris Masham and The Law of
Reason or Nature”,
The Modern Schoolman
, 88(3–4):
245–265.
–––, 2018, “‘Heads Cast in Metahysical
Moulds’. Damaris Masham on the Method and Nature of
Metaphysics”, in
Early Modern Women on Metaphysics
,
Emily Thomas (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1–27.
–––, 2019, “Women Philosophers and the
Cosmological Argument: A Case Study in Feminist History of
Philosophy”, in
A Feminist History of Philosophy
,
Eileen O’Neill and Mary Lascano (eds.), Dordrecht: Springer,
23–47.
Laslett, Peter, 1953, “Masham of Oates”,
History
Today
, 3: 535–43.
Myers, Joanne E., 2013, “Enthusiastic Improvement: Mary
Astell and Damaris Masham on Sociability”,
Hypatia
,
28(3): 533–550.
Penaluna, Regan, 2007, “The Social and Political Thought of
Damaris Cudworth Masham”, in
Virtue, Liberty, and
Toleration: Political Ideas of European Women, 1400–1800
,
Jacqueline Broad and Karen Green (eds.), Dordrecht: Springer,
111–122.
Phemister, Pauline, 2007, “‘All the time and
everywhere everything’s the same as here’: the Principle
of Uniformity in the Correspondence between Leibniz and Lady
Masham”, in Paul Lodge (ed.),
Leibniz and his
Correspondents
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Phemister, Pauline, and Justin Smith, 2007, “Leibniz and the
Cambridge Platonists and the Debate over Plastic Natures”, in
Pauline Phemister and Stuart Brown (eds.),
Leibniz’s Philosophy
and the English-Speaking World
, Dordrecht, Springer, pp.
95–110.
Ready, Kathryn, 2002, “Damaris Cudworth Masham, Catharine
Trotter Cockburn, and the Feminist Legacy of Locke’s Theory of
Personal Identity”,
Eighteenth-Century Studies
, 35:
563–76.
Simonutti, Luisa, 1987, “Damaris Cudworth Masham: una Lady
della Repubblica delle Lettere”,
Scritti in Onore di Eugenio
Garin
, Pisa: Scuola Normale Superiore, pp. 141–165.
Sleigh, Robert C., 2005, “Reflections on the Masham-Leibniz
Correspondence”, in
Early Modern Philosophy: Mind, Matter,
and Metaphysics
, Christia Mercer and Eileen O’Neill (eds.).
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Widmaier, Rita, 1986, “Korrespondenten von G. W. Leibniz: 8.
Damaris Masham, geb. Cudworth geb. 18. Januar 1658 in Cambridge
– gest. 20. April 1708 in Oates”,
Studia
Leibnitiana
, 18: 211–227.
Woolhouse, Roger, 2003, “Lady Masham’s Account of
Locke”,
Locke Studies
, 3: 167–193.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Project Vox
Related Entries
Astell, Mary
|
Cambridge Platonists
|
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm
|
Locke, John
|
Malebranche, Nicolas