Metaepistemology
First published Wed Mar 9, 2022
Whereas epistemology is (broadly speaking) the philosophical theory of
knowledge, its nature and scope,
metaepistemology
takes a
step back from particular substantive debates in epistemology in order
to inquire into the assumptions and commitments made by those who
engage in these debates. This entry will focus on a selection of these
assumptions and commitments, including (§1) whether (or not)
there are objective epistemic facts; and how to characterize (§2)
the subject matter and (§3) the methodology of epistemology.
1. Are there epistemic facts? Metaepistemological realism vs. anti-realism
1.1 Metaepistemological realism
1.2 Metaepistemological anti-realism
2. Characterizations of epistemology
2.1 Theory of knowledge, inquiry, and intellectual ethics
2.2 Belief-based and credence-based epistemology
3. Methodology in epistemology
3.1 Methodism and particularism
3.2 Analyses in epistemology: semantic, conceptual and metaphysical
3.3 Experimental epistemology
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Are there epistemic facts? Metaepistemological realism vs. anti-realism
One dividing line in metaepistemology is broadly analogous to a
familiar dividing line in metaethics, between (roughly)
realist
and
anti-realist
positions. This section
will discuss several prominent realist and anti-realist positions in
metaepistemology and, in some cases, we will note connections between
these positions and their metaethical counterparts (see also entry on
metaethics
).
First, however, it will be useful to clarify how we are using these
terms. It is contentious what, for a given subject matter α,
realism,
vis-à-vis
α amounts to. One generally
accepted idea is that an α-realist takes α-claims to be
validated
by the way things stand in the world (Blackburn
1993). In the epistemic case of interest here, realism implies that
attributions of, e.g., knowledge, justification, epistemic virtue and
epistemic vice are validated by how things stand in the world. Compare
here with the
metaethical realist
(e.g., Shafer-Landau 2003)
who takes attributions of rightness, goodness, moral virtue and vice
to be so validated. Likewise, just as the metaethical anti-realist
denies that moral claims have this kind of status, the
metaepistemological anti-realist
will deny the same
vis-à-vis
epistemic claims, in at least one of two
ways: either (i) by denying that there are any epistemic facts
(metaepistemological non-cognitivists and error-theorists fall into
this category of anti-realism). Or, alternatively, metaepistemological
anti-realists might (ii) grant that there are epistemic facts while
denying that the obtaining of these facts is
independent
of
anyone’s beliefs, linguistic practices, conceptual schemes, and
so on. Here we may locate metaepistemological idealism,
constructivism, subjectivism, and relativism (for discussion, see
Miller 2002 [2019]; Cuneo 2007; Carter 2016; Baghramian & Carter
2015 [2021]).
In what follows, we’ll look first at metaepistemological
realism, and then at a few versions of metaepistemological
anti-realism.
1.1 Metaepistemological realism
Metaepistemological realists
at the very least
accept that
there are epistemic facts, and that these facts are not
(non-trivially) mind-dependent. Thus, this means that, for the
realist, when you say that you
know
that Paris is the capital
of France, there is a
fact
of the matter—either you do
or you do not know this—and further, the obtaining of this fact
is
not
simply down to, e.g., cultural consensus, approval, or
what you
think
about what you know. Thus, for the realist,
when two people disagree about who knows what, this disagreement is
genuine; both parties cannot be right (cf., Kölbel 2004;
MacFarlane 2011); likewise, for the realist, there will be cases where
you believe you know something, and you are mistaken.
The above kind of minimal metaepistemological realism is plausibly the
default
presupposition
of many first-order debates in
mainstream epistemology, even though—as a metaepistemological
position—it is not often explicitly argued for (Carter 2016: Ch.
1). There are, however, some notable exceptions in the recent
literature, due to Paul Boghossian (2006) and Terence Cuneo (2007).
Both Boghossian and Cuneo share a common kind of
“pro-realist” argumentative strategy, which is to argue
that metaepistemological anti-realism, in one or more of its forms, is
implausible or incoherent, and thus, that a realist position holds up
better by contrast.
Boghossian (2006), challenges specifically those strands of
metaepistemological anti-realism that maintain that epistemic facts
are (strongly) mind-dependent. His critical target is a doctrine he
terms “Equal Validity”, which Boghossian identifies with
the kind of “postmodern relativism” about knowledge that
he suggests is now orthodoxy in “vast stretches of the
humanities and social sciences” (2006: 2).
Equal Validity
: There are many radically different, yet
“equally valid” ways of knowing the world, with science
being just one of them. (Boghossian 2006: 2)
Boghossian challenges Equal Validity under two guises:
constructivism
and
relativism
(see
§1.2
),
 in the service of defending a realist position he terms
“absolutism”. Importantly, though, the version of
metaepistemological realism that Boghossian contrasts (under the
description of “absolutism”) favorably to constructivist
and relativist anti-realism goes beyond the kind of minimal realist
position described above. Boghossian’s absolutism
involves—additionally—a package of theses about the status
of
epistemic principles
, which he defines as “general
normative propositions” that specify conditions under which a
particular type of belief is justified (Boghossian 2006: 85; 2001: 38
fn. 3). Included in this package are the theses that (i) there is an
objective fact of the matter as to which epistemic principles are
true; (ii) there is a uniquely correct set of epistemic principles,
which all rational agents are bound by; and that (iii) if there are
objective facts about which epistemic principles (and which particular
epistemic judgments) are true, these facts should be
knowable
: it ought to be possible to arrive at justified
beliefs about them (2006: 77).
While a critic might resist the rationale for accepting
Boghossian’s absolutist position by challenging his critical
assessments of the viability of the constructivist and relativist
positions that he associates with “Equal Validity” (see,
e.g., MacFarlane 2008a; Wright 2008; Sosa 2008; Carter 2016: Ch. 6;
Kusch 2009), a separate space for critical engagement concerns
Boghossian’s characterization of the metaepistemological option
space. For example, even if Equal Validity is false,
Boghossian’s strong version of absolutism described should be
accepted only if it also compares favorably with forms of anti-realism
that (unlike constructivism and relativism) reject epistemic facts
wholesale (e.g., metaepistemic error theory—see
§1.2
),
 as well as, importantly, with
weaker
forms of
metaepistemological realism that do not sign up to Boghossian’s
full package. On this latter point, for example, it has been argued
that one can agree with Boghossian in rejecting constructivism and
relativism (as well as other forms of anti-realism) while subscribing
to a version of metaepistemological realism that maintains that
epistemic principles are objective and knowable, but relative to
worlds, and thus, that there is not a unique set of epistemic
principles applicable across all worlds (for discussion of this kind
of view, see Carter & McKenna 2021).
Whereas Boghossian’s wider objective in defending (a version of)
metaepistemological realism was to press back against
“postmodern” thinking in the academy, Terence
Cuneo’s (2007) defense of metaepistemological realism also comes
in the service of a further objective, in Cuneo’s case, a
defense of metaethical realism. Cuneo’s master argument is as
follows:
If moral facts do not exist, then epistemic facts do not
exist.
Epistemic facts exist.
So, moral facts exist.
If moral facts exist, then moral realism is true.
So, moral realism is true (Cuneo 2007: 6)
Because Premise (2) is his central focus, Cuneo’s case for
metaethical realism largely boils down to a sustained defense of
metaepistemological realism (see also here Cuneo & Shafer-Landau
2014). Also, like Boghossian, Cuneo’s case in favor of
metaepistemological realism proceeds as a negative case against
various forms of metaepistemological anti-realism, including
especially error theory and expressivism (see
§1.2
for discussion of these views).
Of special interest to Cuneo’s own version of
metaepistemological realism is the sense in which it—like
Boghossian’s “absolutism”—goes beyond a
“minimal” realist’s commitment to countenancing
mind-independent epistemic facts. For Cuneo, metaepistemological
realism of the sort he takes to be “paradigmatic” (and
analogous to metaethical realism) will also accept the following:
[Epistemic facts] are prescriptive … they are, imply, or
indicate reasons for properly situated individuals to behave in
certain ways … regardless of whether these agents care about
conducting their behaviour in a rational way, whether they belong to a
social group of a certain kind, or whether they have entered into
social agreements with others. (Cuneo 2007: 59)
As Cuneo sees it, then, when the realist accepts that there is an
epistemic fact consisting in your having an (epistemic) reason to
believe that
p
for which evidence is compelling, then
that you have this epistemic reason
is “not contingent
on whether [you] care about believing what is true” (2007: 59).
This qualification Cuneo takes to be important for distinguishing
between the particular kind of epistemic facts countenanced by the
realist as such, from epistemic facts capturing mere
hypothetical
epistemic imperatives—e.g., “If I
want to believe something true about
p
, then I have a reason
to believe what the evidence says about
p
”—which
epistemic error theorists (e.g., Olson 2011, 2014) can accept under
the banner of metaepistemological anti-realism.
Whereas Cuneo’s and Boghossian’s respective cases for
metaepistemological realism are negative in that they rest principally
on challenging the credentials of various forms of anti-realism, at
least two other strategies do not. One such envisioned metanormative
strategy would be to (rather than as Cuneo has done) aim to establish
metaethical realism on independent grounds and then argue from here to
meta
epistemological
realism via a parity premise (for an
instance of such a strategy, see Kyriacou 2018). Fourthly, we can
envision a kind of pragmatic justification of metaepistemological
realism, as a precondition for doing first-order epistemology. For
example, as such a line of thought goes, paradigmatic first-order
debates in epistemology—take for instance the decades-long
debate between Richard Feldman and Alvin Goldman about whether
epistemic internalism or externalism is correct in
epistemology—tend to make sense only against a background
presumption of metaepistemological realism. If this is right, then, as
Carter (2016: Ch. 1, Ch. 9) has suggested, the
presumption
of
metaepistemological realism is plausibly essential to pursuing typical
projects that are characteristic of mainstream analytic
epistemology.
1.2 Metaepistemological anti-realism
There are two central types of metaepistemological anti-realist, those
that reject epistemic facts and those that accept epistemic facts but
reject that the obtaining of these facts is mind-independent in the
way the realist insists. Explicit defenses of anti-realist positions
in metaepistemology are few and far between—at least, compared
with explicit defense of versions of metaethical
anti-realism—and rely typically on rationales drawn from
metanormative theory and philosophy of language more so than
epistemology.
Within the first broad type of anti-realism—which parts with
realism by denying the existence of epistemic facts—we can
locate (i)
metaepistemological error theory
and (i)
metaepistemological non-cognitivism
, the most typical version
of which goes under the heading
epistemic expressivism
(Chrisman 2012; Ahlstrom-Vij 2013, 2018).
In the case of metaepistemological error theory, two prominent
defenses are due to Jonas Olson and, with some qualifications, Bart
Streumer (2008, 2013, 2017). Olson’s tack is a kind of
“reverse” of Cuneo’s parity strategy; that is, Olson
(2011, 2014) first takes himself to have established
metaethical
error theory on independent grounds, and then
argues from here via a parity premise, for metaepistemological error
theory. Two ways to press this rationale will be to either reject
moral error theory (e.g., Finlay 2008) or to challenge Olson’s
use of a parity premise (see Côté-Bouchard &
Littlejohn 2018 for criticism). Streumer, by contrast, embraces
metaepistemological error theory by defending, in the first instance,
a kind of universal metanormative error theory (Streumer 2008, 2017)
which, if correct, would imply metaepistemological error
theory—including, importantly, the thesis that there are no
epistemic reasons for belief. Some critics of error theory, such as
Nishi Shah (2010), have challenged the stability of such an epistemic
error theory by appealing to considerations to do with the alleged
inescapable character of epistemic norms. A different line of
criticism of epistemic error theory insists that—by the
theory’s own lights—one has no reason to believe it
(compare here with Putnam’s (1981: 121) critique of Protagorean
relativism as a position a proponent ought to think her opponent has
no reason to believe). Whether this second line of criticism against
the epistemic error theorist holds water remains contentious in two
ways; for one, it is contested whether, if epistemic error theory
implies that there is no reason to believe the theory, this should be
held as a mark against the theory (for relevant discussion see Hyun
& Sampson 2014; Rowland 2012; and Streumer 2013); secondly, it is
contentious whether it is
possible
to genuinely believe the
epistemic error theory, regardless of whether, were one to believe it,
one could have an epistemic reason for doing so. On this second point,
see, along with Streumer (2013), Lillehammer and Möller (2015)
and Olson (2016).
Along with metaepistemological error theory, another notable form of
metaepistemological anti-realism that parts ways with realism by
denying the very existence of epistemic facts is defended by
metaepistemological
non-cognitivists
(Field 1996,
1998; Heller 1999; Gibbard 2003; Blackburn 1996; Chrisman 2007; Ridge
2007; Ahlstrom-Vij 2013). Versions of this thesis vary in their scope
and commitments. One early and influential example of epistemic
non-cognitivism is Hartry Field’s non-cognitivism about
a
priori
justification. Field holds that:
we should have a non-factualist attitude towards
justification…; it is a matter of policy rather than
fact,…and the question is only whether it is a good policy. It
makes no sense to ask whether logic
really is
justifiable a
priori. (Field 1996: 377, for criticism see Kvanvig 2003 and Jenkins
2008)
Likewise, for Mark Heller (1999)—a non-cognitivist about
“knowledge”—“‘Knowledge’ is our
word for saying that S’s epistemic condition is good
enough”. What unifies metaepistemological non-cognitivist
positions, according to Matthew Chrisman (2012) is a commitment to
thinking that
epistemic claims express a … non-representational kind of
mental state … epistemic judgments have, at least in part, a
desire-like direction of fit with the world. (2012: 119)
Most forms of metaepistemological non-cognitivism go a step further to
embrace the (optional) expressivist thesis that, e.g., knowledge and
justification attributions express “pro” attitudes
(Chrisman 2012). Proponents of general versions of metaepistemological
non-cognitivism (Gibbard 2003; Blackburn 1996; Chrisman 2007; Ridge
2007) have typically availed themselves to the idea that, as Michael
Ridge puts it,
arguments for metaethical expressivism carry over nicely to provide
arguments for expressivism about epistemic discourse. (2007: 83)
Critics by contrast have typically focused on particular problems that
appear to arise for metaepistemical non-cognitivism without assuming
such problems carry over by parity to metaethical expressivism. For
example, according to Jon Kvanvig (2003: 176), metaepistemological
non-cognitivism is incoherent (even if metaethical expressivism is
not) because a defense of the view will have to presuppose the truth
of certain norms of justification and explanation. In a similar vein,
Michael P. Lynch (2009) suggests that “we lack any
standpoint” from which we can make the position intelligible.
This is because, for Lynch, as a prerequisite of holding the
non-cognitivist’s position (including a denial of epistemic
value facts), one must disengage from any commitment to epistemic
values, which is to take up a standpoint disengaged from epistemic
values; but this, he maintains, is a standpoint we cannot take up
while inquiring. In this respect, the incoherence of metaethical
non-cognitivism lies in its incompatibility with inquiry. For
criticisms to incoherence-style arguments against epistemic
expressivism (though these critiques fall short of outright
endorsement of expressivism), see, e.g., Carter & Chrisman 2012
and Kappel 2011).
While metaepistemological error theory and noncognitivism represent
the most notable examples of metaepistemological views that are
anti-realist in virtue of denying epistemic facts, there have
been—throughout the history of epistemology—a wide variety
of views that would qualify as anti-realist in virtue of maintaining
that epistemic facts are
mind-dependent
in a way that the
realist will reject. Here we will discuss two such positions: idealism
and relativism.
According to idealism (e.g., of a Berkeleyan sort),
anything we
know
we know because some mental state of affairs obtains, and
this is because, for such an idealist, there is no external world;
empirical reality is internal to our minds. This view of course
implies that truths we might know, and indeed any epistemic facts,
will be
trivially
mind dependent, given that part of what it
is to be an idealist is to deny that there is a mind-independent
objective reality. Importantly, this kind of heavyweight anti-realist
position is distinct from, and not implied by,
indirect
realist
views in the philosophy of perception (e.g., F. Jackson
1977), which maintain that that we are only indirectly aware of the
object of perceptual experiences by being aware of, e.g., sense-data.
Indirect realism in the philosophy of perception is compatible with
metaepistemological realism, while full-fledged idealism about
empirical reality is not.
Although metaepistemological idealism has not held much sway in
epistemological circles (with the exception of, perhaps, with G.E.
Moore who arguably attempted to refute it (for discussion see Sosa
2009: Ch. 1)
metaepistemological
relativism
has by
contrast generated much more interest. Metaepistemological relativists
(hereafter relativists) regard the status of (at least some kinds of)
epistemological claims as, in some interesting way,
relative
;
that is to say, relativists hold that the truths which (some kinds of)
epistemological claims aspire to are relative truths (Baghramian &
Carter 2015 [2021]).
While some limited forms of metaepistemological relativism are implied
by relativistic positions in the philosophy of science (Kuhn 1962;
Laudan 1990; Hacking 1982) concerning the status of scientific
knowledge, there are two forms of relativism that bear special
relevance to epistemology and which go beyond claims about scientific
knowledge specifically: these are (i)
explicitly relational
forms epistemic relativism (e.g., Rorty 1979), and
new-age
epistemic relativism—viz., relativism about the semantics of
“knows”—of the sort defended by John MacFarlane
(2014).
The first explicitly relational form of relativism fits the
description of “the relativist” as challenged by
Boghossian (2006) in
Fear of Knowledge.
According to
Boghossian, the relativist should be understood as submitting the
following “epistemic relationist” thesis:
If a person,
S
’s, epistemic judgments are to have any
prospect of being true, we must not construe his utterances of the
form “
E
justifies belief
B
” as
expressing the claim
E
justifies belief
B
but rather
as expressing the claim: According to the epistemic system
C
,
that
I
,
S
, accept, information
E
justifies
belief
B
. (Boghossian 2006: 84)
This characterization of relativism is called
“replacement” relativism because it is effectively
endorsing a
replacing
of unqualified epistemic claims with
explicitly relational ones that make implicit epistemic standards
explicit. This is precisely the kind of endorsement Boghossian thinks
Richard Rorty is encouraging, in suggesting that, e.g., Galileo and
Bellarmine are each right about the cosmos—Galileo about
heliocentrism, Bellarmine about geocentrism—
according
to
the different “epistemic grids” each accepts
(Rorty 1979: 330).
One important feature of the above explicitly relational kind of
relativism is that, once the “hidden parameter” implicit
in e.g., knowledge and justification attributions is made explicit,
knowledge and justification attributions then get their truth values
absolutely
(MacFarlane 2011); such attributions, thus, do
not
get their truth values
relatively.
For instance,
such a view implies that an attribution such as “Galileo is
epistemically justified in believing heliocentrism” is
absolutely
true, given that it is absolutely true that
Galileo is epistemically justified in believing heliocentrism,
according to the scientific worldview that Galileo accepts.
But, according to John MacFarlane and Crispin Wright, once this point
is appreciated—viz., that Boghossian’s characterization of
epistemic relativism is one that countenances absolute truths—it
is contestable whether the position is genuinely relativistic in a
philosophically interesting sense. As Wright (2008) says, the
construal of epistemic relativism as signing on to the absolute truth
of (explicitly relational) claims about knowledge and
justification
[…] is just to fail to take seriously the thesis that claims
such as [sic …
S
is justified in believing
X
]
can indeed be true or false, albeit,
only relatively so
.
(2008: 383, our italics).
In a similar vein, MacFarlane takes Boghossian’s
characterization of epistemic relativism to be modelled on Gilbert
Harman’s (1975) moral relativism, which is (by
MacFarlane’s lights) best understood as a version of epistemic
contextualism (see MacFarlane 2014: 33, fn. 5).
According to “new age” relativism (MacFarlane 2005, 2008b,
2011, 2014; Richard 2004), by contrast, attributions of knowledge and
justification are candidates only for
relative
truth values,
and this is for the reason that their truth is always relative to a
context in which they are being
assessed
, and there are
potentially infinitely
many such contexts, and so there will
never be any “once and for all” truth value for any given
knowledge ascription. In a bit more detail, for the new age relativist
about knowledge ascriptions, when
S
asserts that
“
X
knows there is a barn”, the proposition
S
expresses with this assertion gets a truth value on the
relativist’s semantics for “knows” only once the
epistemic standard of the
assessor
is specified (e.g., only
once we supply an epistemic standard for an individual who is
assessing
S
’s attribution of knowledge to
X
);
if the assessor is enthralled in a sceptical debate or has money
invested in whether
X
knows there is a barn, the standard for
the assessor might be high, if not, perhaps it won’t. Crucially,
without
the specification of an assessor’s standard for
S
’s knowledge attribution,
S
’s claim
that “
X
knows there is a barn” lacks a
truth-value in much that same way as, e.g., indexical expressions such
as “
X
is here now” do not get a truth-value
independent of a specification of contextual facts about the context
of
use
(i.e., facts about the time and location in which the
utterance is made). Another point for clarification here (see entry on
realism, section on new relativism
for further details) is that, although the epistemic contextualist
also
takes knowledge attributions to be relative always to a
“standards” parameter supplied by context, notice that for
the contextualist, the value of this parameter will always be supplied
by the
context of use
(which is a standard fixed, for a given
attribution, once and for all), whereas the relativist takes the
relevant standards parameter to be supplied completely independently
of the context of use, always only by the context of assessment.
These two positions under the broad description of metaepistemological
relativism—the explicitly relational kind of relativism
Boghossian attributes to Rorty, and the semantically motivated
“new age” relativism about knowledge attributions defended
by MacFarlane—are strikingly different. Each appeals to
distinctive kinds of considerations and is subject to distinctive
kinds of criticisms. The former appeals, e.g., to considerations of
tolerance and diversity (e.g., Rorty 1979, 1989). The latter appeals
to patterns of our use of “knows” in the service of
defending truth conditions for knowledge ascriptions; as such it is a
semantic thesis. A point we will take up in
§3.2
is the broader epistemological question of how to locate semantic
theses about “knows” within epistemological
theorizing.
2. Characterizations of epistemology
One thriving question in metaepistemology concerns how to characterize
the subject matter of epistemology. What is epistemology about? What
questions are genuine
epistemological
questions?
This section will discuss two dimensions to the “subject
matter” question which have generated recent interest. The first
 (
§2.1
)
 concerns how and to what extent epistemic norms include the norms
governing good
inquiry
, including, e.g., norms governing what
inquiries to take up, and when to terminate them. The second
 (
§2.2
)
 concerns the respective places of belief versus credence in
epistemology, and whether either should be regarded as of a more
fundamental theoretical standing than the other.
2.1 Theory of knowledge, inquiry, and intellectual ethics
On one very wide conception of epistemology, epistemology is the
“theory of knowledge”, including its nature (what is
knowledge?) and scope (how much if any do we have?) This definition,
though common, is of course inaccurate. Epistemologists are
interested, for one thing, in epistemic justification, understanding,
rationality, and their associated norms. For another,
epistemologists—especially those working in the tradition of
responsibilist
virtue epistemology
(Zagzebski 1996,
2020; Baehr 2006, 2011; Tanesini 2021; Battaly 2015, 2018; Cassam
2019, 2020)—are interested in the kinds of character traits
(e.g., openmindedness, intellectual honesty, intellectual courage)
that put us in good positions to gain epistemically valuable goods
(knowledge, justification, etc.) and which contribute to intellectual
flourishing.
Is epistemology about
all
of these things, and if so, is
there a way to characterize epistemology’s subject matter that
isn’t too thin so as to apply to ethics and other areas?
One distinction within epistemology—very broadly
construed—which offers a solution to this question is to
distinguish between two distinct but complementary “sides”
to epistemology: the side that concerns our evaluation of our
constitutive attempts
to gain knowledge (viz., our beliefs
and our judgments about whether something is so), and the side that
concerns our evaluation of which inquiries to take up, and how to
sustain them given our limited resources, interests, and concerns.
Ernest Sosa (2021: Ch. 2; see also 2015: Ch. 2) refers to these two
sides of epistemology, broadly construed, as
gnoseology
and
intellectual ethics
, respectively.
To get a sense of this distinction, consider how we might evaluate an
archer’s shot, aimed at a target.
Even if
this target
was a poor target to have initially chosen as the object of
one’s archery attempt
from a practical point of view
(perhaps hitting it will have bad ethical consequences, perhaps the
target is too easy to be worthwhile), such a fact would be irrelevant
to whether we should evaluate the shot as
accurate
when it
in fact
hits the target as intended, and for that matter,
whether the shot is
competent
(i.e., if it issues from a
skill to reliably enough hit the target in appropriate conditions), or
apt
(i.e., if it is accurate because competent), or
fully
apt
(in that it aptness is attained aptly, and not just by
accident or luck. In this respect, the success, competence, and
aptness of a shot, as well as its
full
aptness, can all be
appreciated as “sealed off” from many
considerations—which speak well or poorly of the
archer—that concern how the archer came to select that
particular shot, and how else she has conducted herself in doing so.
Some
of the wisdom of shot selection is itself gnoseological,
as when it bears importantly on whether the risk of failure it too
high, the assured reliability sufficient. After all, these will bear
on whether the shot will be not only apt but also
fully
apt,
as not only its accuracy but also its aptness is aptly attained. Even
so, we
do care
about wise rather than foolish shot selection
in evaluating archery more holistically, where we import
considerations that go beyond a focus on accuracy or aptness. We might
admire an archer for choosing well, from a
practical
point of
view, what targets to attempt and which to forbear from attempting,
and for her resilience in continuing to pursue a worthy aim, despite
obstacles.
On Sosa’s (2021) approach, what goes for the archer goes,
mutatis mutandis,
for the inquirer. Whereas our evaluation of
the inquirer’s constitutive attempts at knowing (viz., her
intellectual shots) are assessable as successful, competent, and
apt—these are
gnoseological
or knowledge-related
assessments—our evaluations of how the inquirer conducts herself
as an inquirer—apart from her constitutive attempts at
knowing—also matter, but
some of these
are best
understood as part of a different normative domain of epistemology:
intellectual ethics
. Here we should distinguish the
constitutive
attempt to answer the pertinent question
knowledgeably, and how that differs from the preliminary attempts to
eventually answer the question knowledgeably. Once one
gives
one’s answer in the constitutive attempt to answer
knowledgeably, that is no longer inquiry. Inquiry has a distinctive
aim of its own, that of
putting oneself in a position to
constitutively make one’s attempt to answer knowledgeably.
Once one is ready to answer, once one considers oneself to be in a
position to make a proper such constitutive attempt, one ceases
inquiring, and one then
gives
one’s answer, even if it
is an answer that one gives to oneself
in foro interno
.
When you make a constitutive attempt to attain aptness on a question
whether p, and especially when you inquire in the endeavor to put
yourself in a position to make such a constitutive attempt and to do
so aptly, both what you do in so inquiring, and what you do in making
your constitutive attempt can be assessed either gnoseologically or in
the broader way of intellectual ethics where anything goes, anything
that bears on the desirability and appropriateness of such an attempt
or such an endeavor. Gnoseological assessment can be of constitutive
attempts to attain aptness or of endeavors to put oneself in a
position to (aptly) make one’s constitutive attempt by actually
answering the question aptly. Either way, the assessment is telically
constrained by the gnoseological aims of attaining aptness of alethic
affirmation, of correct (true) answer. Practical values are mostly
irrelevant to such assessment, whether it is assessment of inquiry or
assessment of constitutive attempts to answer a question
knowledgeably. (But this is not to rule out that practical values
might still be relevant at a deep global level. For example, they may
still bear on the very norms and standards
properly
set by
epistemic communities for when reliability is high enough to sustain
long-term belief storage, beyond the time when one can be expected to
retain the operative reasons for the storing of that belief.)
On Sosa’s view, drawing that distinction between gnoseology and
intellectual ethics allows us to better appreciate the sense in which
practical considerations bear importance in epistemology. While they
do not matter for gnoseological assessment as such (with the exception
noted), they are often important to intellectual ethics, viz., to the
questions that one actually bothers to answer, even to those that one
bothers to answer in constitutive attempts to answer aptly, and of
course practical values matter also to what inquiries one takes up,
and how one budgets intellectual resources. However, the distinction
helps us to avoid
conflating
different kinds of intellectual
norms, while at the same time allowing these different kinds of norms
(of gnoseology and intellectual ethics) to coexist within a wider
picture of intellectual life.
Sosa’s approach may be contrasted with three different kinds of
approaches, due to Linda Zagzebski (1996, 2020), Christoph Kelp
(2021a,b), and Jane Friedman (2020, forthcoming)—as each hold
different views about how norms governing good (and bad) inquiry
should be conceived of, in connection with norms governing belief,
under the banner of epistemology. For Zagzebski, there can be no
meaningful distinction between gnoseology and intellectual ethics
because our constitutive attempts at knowing are
exercises
of
intellectual character virtues that, themselves, reflect our
motivations and values as inquirers. For example, for Zagzebski,
knowledge just is gaining a true belief because of an intellectual
virtue, which she construes as a
deep and enduring acquired intellectual excellence consisting of an
admirable intellectual motive disposition and reliable success in
reaching the truth because of the behavior to which that motive leads.
(Zagzebski 2020: 103)
Thus, for Zagzebski, an evaluation of your attempt at knowing is
at the same time
is an evaluation of your intellectual
character and motivations; there is for Zagzebski no knowledge
compresent with bad intellectual motivations and thus with bad
character (though see Sosa 2017: 148 and Carter forthcoming: 2 for
criticisms in the case of perceptual knowledge).
A different take on these two landscapes, which lines up more closely
with Sosa than with Zagzebski, is due to Christoph Kelp (2021a), who
construes epistemology
as
the theory of inquiry. According to
Kelp, we should “take inquiry (or finding out about things) as
the starting point for epistemological theorizing” (Kelp 2021a:
2). Whereas Sosa takes constitutive attempts at knowing—viz.,
belief and judgments—to have have aims internal to them (with
inquiry itself best understood a wider kind of activity within which
we make these attempts), Kelp takes
inquiry itself
to be a
kind of activity with an aim, where the particular aim of a given
inquiry depends on the type of inquiry it is. For Kelp,
knowledge
is the constitutive aim of inquiry into specific
questions (e.g., whether Frege ever met Russell) and understanding is
the constitutive aim of inquiry into general phenomena (e.g., the
UK’s exit from the European Union, the rise of the Roman Empire,
etc.). While Kelp doesn’t attempt to analyze either knowledge or
understanding reductively, he offers non-reductive
“network” analyses for both knowledge and understanding
which are meant to elucidate the nature of knowledge and understanding
in terms of their place in inquiry.
A fourth kind of picture is developed in recent work by Jane Friedman
(2020;
forthcoming
). Like Sosa, Friedman distinguishes
between norms that govern believing and norms that govern ways of
inquiring, the latter of which she terms “zetetic” norms.
How are zetetic norms related to epistemic norms? Friedman’s
answer is that they are often in stark tension with one another, and
in ways epistemologists have often overlooked. As she puts it,
That some judgment or belief is, by our current measures, in
impeccable epistemic standing is not a good guide to whether
it’s an acceptable judgment to make in inquiry. (2020: 533)
The extent of the tension between these two kinds of norms, Friedman
claims, raises a kind of puzzle, given the presumably close connection
between the epistemic and the zetetic, viz., between aimed believing
and aimed inquiring. According to Friedman,
I think following just those thoughts through calls for a revision to
our standard epistemic norms, and perhaps even a significant one. The
only alternative seems to me to involve insisting on a fairly radical
separation of epistemology and a theory of inquiry. (2020: 533)
2.2 Belief-based and credence-based epistemology
One of the most significant divides in contemporary epistemology
concerns the
granularity
of the target psychological
phenomena of interest: some projects in epistemology (e.g., the
traditional analysis of knowledge) make use primarily of
belief
and its cognates (e.g., disbelief, and suspended
judgment)—all of which are comparatively coarse grained in
comparison with
credences
—the target psychological
phenomena of central interest to Bayesian epistemologists—which
are fine-grained and precise, and which represent a thinker’s
subjective probability or confidence with respect to a
proposition.
A metaepistemological research question that has generated much
discussion recently asks how we should understand the relationship
between belief and credence within epistemology generally. Is either
more fundamental to answering questions of epistemological interest
than the other?
One trivial approach to resolving such questions is implied by those
epistemologists who are
eliminativists
about either belief or
credence but not the other. For example, Richard Jeffrey (1970) and
more recently Richard Pettigrew (2016) affirm credences while denying
that beliefs exist (or at least express sympathy to denying this, in
Pettigrew’s case); by contrast, Richard Holton (2008) takes the
opposite position, affirming beliefs while denying that credences
exist.
These eliminativist positions are the minority (for discussion see E.
Jackson 2020); more common are positions that either regard belief or
credence to be more fundamental than the other, or that neither is
more fundamental than the other (i.e., belief-credence
dualism
—see Staffel 2019; Buchak 2014; E. Jackson
forthcoming; Weisberg 2020). Non-eliminativists who deny dualism
typically defend either that (i) credence is a species of belief (or
can be explained in terms of or otherwise reduced to belief), or that
belief is a species of credence (or can be explained in terms of
otherwise reduced to credence). The former kind of position is usually
described as the “belief-first” position (e.g., Moon &
Jackson 2020; Holton 2008; Easwaran 2016; Moon 2018; Carter, Jarvis,
& Rubin 2016), the latter as the “credence-first”
position (e.g., Wedgwood 2012; Greco 2015; Weatherson 2005; Lee &
Silvia 2022).
While it might be tempting to think that the
“belief-first” versus “credence-first” debate
is a proxy for a wider debate about whether the research agenda and
questions of mainstream epistemology are more fundamental than those
of formal epistemology (e.g., Bayesianism), this inference would be
too quick.
For example, as Scott Sturgeon (2020: 2) points out, the
informal/formal distinction, ostensibly a methodological distinction,
does not line up neatly with the belief/credence distinction in
granularity. Although there is of course
informal
work in
epistemology on
coarse-grained attitudes
(an example here is
traditional work on the Gettier problem and the JTB analysis of
knowledge; see entry on
the analysis of knowledge
),
 there is also informal work in epistemology on fine-grained
attitudes—an example Sturgeon notes is Keith Lehrer’s work
on comparative confidence. Likewise, some projects in epistemology use
formal methods to explore the epistemology of belief (see, e.g.,
Pollock 1987) as well as, more typically, the epistemology of
credence.
Putting this together, Sturgeon’s contention is that a
granularity/methodology pairing in epistemology is misleading, and
that more accurate is a picture that makes room for four broad kinds
of project-types in epistemology, which pair combinations of formal
and informal methods with combinations of coarse-grained and
fine-grained attitudes, as represented in the following 2×2
matrix:
Coarse-Grained
Fine-grained
Informal
Informal work on belief and its revision (A)
Informal work on rational confidence and its revision (B)
Formal
Formal work on rational belief and its revision (C)
Formal work on rational confidence and its revision (D)
Table 1
(Sturgeon 2020: 2)
If the epistemology of belief includes both informal (A) and formal
(C) approaches, and the epistemology of credence also admits of formal
(D) and informal approaches (B), we can envision how this might
differently frame the “credence-first” versus
“belief-first” debate described above. For one thing, this
wider option space would invite us to ask whether (under the
credence-first slogan) we should think of cells B and D as more
fundamental than work in cells A and C, or rather, just that work in
cell D is more fundamental than work in cell A. Likewise, the wider
option space invites us to consider whether (under the belief-first
slogan) we should think of cells A and C as more fundamental than work
in cells B and D, or rather, just that work in cell A is more
fundamental than work in cell D.
Furthermore, we might imagine an even further expansion of our 2x2
matrix to a 3x3 matrix. Consider that the above picture, divided four
ways, does not neatly make room for epistemological projects that
combine
coarse-grained and fine-grained attitudes. One
example is Jennifer Lackey’s (2000) approach to defeaters in
epistemology—in which a sufficient
degrees of confidence
against the target proposition can undermine the justification one has
for
believing
the target proposition. Another example is
Sosa’s approach to suspension of judgment (2021: Ch. 4), which
combines coarse-grained and fine-grained attitudes in the an
evaluation of the quality of suspension of judgment. That is, for
Sosa, the quality of suspended judgment is sensitive to
both
(i) the competence by which you align your
degrees of
confidence
with your corresponding degrees of epistemic
probability, as well as (ii) the competence by which you
judge or
suspend
within the respective proper bounds of confidence.
Finally, our table expands even more when we make room for cases of
mixed
methodology (formal
and
informal) to subject
matter that includes combinations of coarse-grained, fine-grained and
mixed
attitudes of interest.
These complications provide a useful perspective to revisit the
initial “credence-first” versus “belief-first”
literature. It suggests exercising caution in moving too quickly from
claims about whether credence or belief “reduce to” or
“are a species of” the other, to more wide-reaching
conclusions about whether one or the other—or for that matter,
the kinds of methods and projects ordinarily associated with one or
another—is of more fundamental epistemological interest.
3. Methodology in epistemology
This section briefly surveys four
methodological
issues in
epistemology, each of which raise (different) and contested issues
about the best ways of doing epistemology. The focus in particular
will be on
 (
§3.1
)
 the legitimacy of assumptions we make about the nature and scope of
knowledge in the course of investigating these very things;
 (
§3.2
)
 what kind of
analyses
(conceptual, semantic, metaphysical)
our epistemological inquiries should be understood as seeking; and
 (
§3.3
)
 the place of experimental results in epistemology.
3.1 Methodism and particularism
The (very broad) characterization of epistemology as the “theory
of knowledge”—even if strictly speaking an oversimplified
picture—is often associated with two different questions about
knowledge:
What do we know?
How do we know?
The answer to the first might include both specific knowledge (i.e.,
your knowledge that you have a hand) or
types
of
knowledge—viz., we have knowledge of mathematics, knowledge of
the past, knowledge of the qualitative character of our experiences,
etc. An answer to the second kind of question would look very
different. An answer to the second would give us criteria (or canons,
methods, principles, or the like) that would explain how we know
whatever it is that we do know (Sosa 1980: 4; cf., Cassam (2007) for a
slightly different “how possible” reading of this second
question).
Because these are different questions of interest—seeking
different kinds of answers—epistemologists have long debated
which to
take up first
in epistemological theorizing. This
methodological question is vexed, because it may seem as though we
cannot begin to answer the first question without already having an
answer to the second (viz., we can’t identify instances of
knowledge absent knowledge of general criteria for identifying those
instances), but we can’t know what the criteria are without
reference to particular cases in connection with which we could then
identify such criteria. According to Roderick Chisholm, the problem of
resolving this
prima facie
tension—the “Problem
of the Criterion”—constitutes
one of the most important and one of the most difficult of all the
problems of philosophy. I am tempted to say that one has not begun to
philosophize until one has faced this problem and has recognized how
unappealing, in the end, each possible solution is. (Chisholm 1973:
12).
The canonical non-skeptical approaches to the problem are
particularism
and
methodism
(for overviews, see
Fumerton 2008; Amico 1993; McCain 2014
 [
Other Internet Resources
];
 Cling 1994; Vahid 2005). The
particularist
strategy (e.g.,
Chisholm 1977) begins with the first question and on this basis then
answers the second question, albeit, in a way that would seem to
assume
ex ante
the falsity of skepticism. The
methodist
makes no such initial assumption that we have any
knowledge at all (i.e., no assumption about
what
we know) and
instead first answers the more general question about what the
criteria are for knowing, and then only on this basis then (with
reference to such criteria) answers question (i).
The analysis of knowledge from the middle 20
th
century
onward (see Ichikawa & Steup 2012 [2018]) largely follows a
particularist strategy, in so far as, especially following Gettier
(1963), candidate criteria for knowing are tested for adequacy against
paradigmatic cases of knowledge as reference points (Shope 1983). Such
a strategy marks a shift from earlier influential strategies, such as
by Descartes and Hume, both of whom took as a starting point—and
in a way that is
in principle
open to skepticism—that
only the obvious and what is proved deductively on its basis can
possibly be known (Sosa 1980: 4). Whereas a standard objection against
the particularist is that she begs the question against the skeptic,
the most standard objection against the methodist starting point is
not so easily captured. As Chisholm puts it, beginning (as the
methodist does) with a broad generalization would
leave us completely in the dark so far as concerns what reasons he may
have for adopting this particular criterion rather than some other.
(Chisholm 1973: 67)
On one way of reading the objection, starting with a broad
generalization is objectionably
arbitrary
; however, the
extent of the arbitrariness here would plausibly depend on whether the
methodist can adduce a reason in favor of her broad starting point
which doesn’t itself involve pointing to specific instances of
knowledge (see, e.g., Amico 1988).
The particularism/methodism divide connects naturally to other wider
issues of interest in epistemology. First, a strong methodist starting
point, such as the starting point from Descartes and Hume, implies a
foundationalist approach to the structure of justified belief and
knowledge. That is, Descartes and Hume opt for foundationalism
by
way of
taking the particular methodist starting point that they
do. Second, the particularism/methodism divide might well be such that
other
epistemological problems of interest are special cases
of this problem. For example, James Van Cleve (1979) and Sosa (2009)
both regard the Cartesian Circle as closely connected with the Problem
of the Criterion in this way. Third, while the Problem of the
Criterion in epistemology is typically formulated in connection with
the project of analyzing
knowledge
, the philosophical
problems associated with methodism or particularism (and which might
be our proper starting point) apply,
mutatis mutandis
, to
projects in epistemology that investigate other epistemic phenomena of
interest, including, e.g., epistemic justification, understanding,
intellectual virtues, and the like. And, as a point of philosophical
method, the problem might also be appreciated as a philosophical
problem
about
philosophical method, one that extends beyond
epistemology to other kinds of philosophical analyses (for discussion
see Fumerton 1995, 2008).
3.2 Analyses in epistemology: semantic, conceptual and metaphysical
The project of analyzing knowledge is often identified with the task
of satisfactorily filling in the English schema “
S
knows that
p
if and only if ___ ”
In the first place, we can assess which attempts are satisfactory
((Ichikawa & Steup 2018; Shope 1983; Littlejohn & Carter 2021:
Ch. 5), or whether all attempts are bound to fail (e.g., Williamson
2000, 2007). Alternatively, from a metaepistemological perspective, we
may step back and ask
what kind of thing we are doing
when
attempting to complete this schema? What is being investigated?
Different answers here track different metaepistemological assumptions
about the role of analyses in epistemology (Sosa 2017: 66–7).
(This point applies generally to analyses in epistemology, though for
illustrative purposes here, we will focus on the simple
“
S
knows that
p
” analysis.)
Here is one kind of metaepistemological answer: By filling in the
above English schema, we are attempting to give a
semantic
analysis of the linguistic expression “
S
knows that
p
”. Those engaged in this project are investigating
meaning.
Of course, one aim might (distally) to investigate
one thing by investigating (proximately) another. And so the
epistemologist might purport to investigate
knowledge
rather
than merely
meaning
by means of a semantic analysis of
“
S
knows that
p
”. This is, in fact, the
kind of position taken by various researchers who maintain that their
positions about the semantics of knowledge attributions should be
understood as casting light on the nature of knowledge (e.g., Stanley
2005; DeRose 2009; MacFarlane 2005; 2008b).
One limitation to this strategy—viz., the strategy of
investigating knowledge
by way of
investigating the meaning
of
knows
—is that (i) when aiming to establish facts
about meaning, we appeal inevitably to patterns of use; and (ii) the
connection between meaning and use is (as the philosophy of language
since the 1960s has shown) at most indirect (e.g., Grice 1989; Searle
1969). As John MacFarlane captures this idea:
Even if we restrict ourselves to sincere, knowledgeable informants,
the most we can discern directly from their use of sentences are the
conditions in which they find it reasonable to use these sentences to
make assertions. And these are not the same as the truth conditions.
(2008b: 783)
A
metaepistemological
task of epistemologists putting forward
semantic analyses—as theses with import in epistemology—is
to articulate how we should understand the evidential import of both
(i) patterns of use (e.g., of “knows”) in supporting
semantic analyses (i.e., truth conditions); and (ii) semantic analyses
in establishing
nature
of the referents of the terms that
feature in those analyses.
A second metaepistemological answer to the question of what one is
doing when filling in the schema “
S
knows that
p
if and only if ___ ” is that one is illuminating
something about the
concept
(or concepts) expressed by that
schema. This answer will be a familiar one for those who view
philosophy, and so epistemology, as centrally engaged in conceptual
analysis (F. Jackson 1998; cf., Williamson 2018; see also for
discussion Balcerak Jackson 2013). What are we investigating when
inquiring about concepts? According to Jackson, filling in the
“
S
knows that
p
” would—if a matter
of investigating concepts—be in the service of explicating our
folk theory of knowledge
by way of
elucidating our concepts
(F. Jackson 1998: 31–33; for discussion see Beaney 2003 [2021]:
§5), or perhaps we are investigating what is involved in
someone’s possession and/or deployment of a given concept (Sosa
2015: Chapter 1). Such a characterization, both of philosophy and by
extension of epistemology, has been subject to sustained recent
criticism from Williamson (2007, 2014, 2018). One common thread of
argument Williamson adverts to draws an analogy between philosophy and
physics. Physicists, who also complete English schemas, are not
plausibly regarded as investigating words and concepts; by parity of
reasoning, it is unclear why epistemologists (or philosophers
generally) should be thought to be investigating merely words and
concepts (rather than
knowledge
) any more than physicists are
investigating words and concepts.
This brings us to a third kind of analysis,
metaphysical
analysis. As Sosa puts it, when analyzing knowledge:
Here our focus is on an objective phenomenon that need be neither
expression nor concept. Our focus is rather on a state that people
host or an act that they perform. This is the phenomenon whose
ontology we now wish to understand. What is the nature of such a state
or act, and how is it grounded? In virtue of what is it actual when it
is actual? (Sosa 2015: Chapter 1)
Given that, by ostensibly completing the English schema
“
S
knows that
p
if and only if ___ ” one
might take herself to be engaged in either semantic, conceptual, or
metaphysical analyses, there is an important role for metaepistemology
to play here, in untangling potential conflations between projects. A
further metaepistemological question is—just as we may ask how
semantic analyses should inform metaphysical analyses, we may also ask
in what way conceptual analyses inform both semantic analyses and
metaphysical analyses. For more comprehensive discussion of the place
(and varieties) of analysis in analytic philosophy more generally, see
the entry
analysis
.
3.3 Experimental epistemology
A relatively recent trend in epistemology—
experimental
epistemology
—(Beebe 2012, 2016; Beebe & Monaghan 2018;
Gerken & Beebe 2016; Turri 2016a,b, 2018; Buckwalter 2012;
Colaço et al. 2014; Carter, Pritchard, & Shepherd 2019)
uses the methodology of psychology, cognitive, and other sciences
(e.g., digital humanities—see Alfano, Carter, & Cheong 2018)
to study (typically) patterns of knowledge, justification and other
epistemic attributions. Results reported have at least two kinds of
potential import in epistemology: first, results may be seen as
bearing on what is or is not believed intuitively by people generally,
and differentially on the basis of cultural and intellectual
backgrounds (e.g., Weinberg, Nichols, & Stich 2001; Colaço
et al. 2014); second, and more ambitiously, such results may be taken
to challenge or support the truth of epistemological positions that
are generally held (Sosa 2007b: 99; see also for discussion Beebe
2016; Knobe & Nichols 2017; Horvath & Koch 2021; Turri
2016a).
Two notable examples where experimental results have been taken to
stand in
prima facie
tension with orthodox positions in
epistemology concern knowledge attributions in cases with (i) shifting
stakes and (ii) unsafe beliefs. In the former case, experimental
results reported in early papers in experimental epistemology
surprisingly did not corroborate a key datum of use appealed to by
epistemic contextualists; that is, contextualists such as Keith DeRose
(1992, 2009) have relied on the thought that—in
“bank” cases (1992: 913)—it is felicitous to
attribute knowledge in low-stakes cases but not in high-stakes cases.
Critics of contextualism had generally accepted this point about use
patterns while challenging the reasoning from here to a contextualist
semantics for “knows”. However, early experimental
epistemology papers by Buckwalter (2010), Feltz and Zarpentine (2010),
and May et al. (2010) reported that participants were similarly
inclined to attribute knowledge across cases with shifting stakes, in
both low- and high-stakes cases (for discussion see Knobe &
Nichols 2017: §2.4).
Another kind of arguably surprising type of result from experimental
epistemology concerns “Gettier cases”, and in two distinct
ways: first by suggesting the Gettier “intuition” (viz.,
that the subject lacks knowledge in standard Gettier cases), is highly
sensitive to cultural background (Weinberg, Nichols, & Stich
2001). In particular, Weinberg et al.’s (2001) study reported
results indicating that laypersons with East and South Asian cultural
backgrounds were inclined (more so than those with Western
backgrounds) to attribute knowledge in standard Gettier cases. This
paper generated debate about the philosophical import of these
results, and led to further related studies. Perhaps most notably,
this includes a 2017 study by Machery et al. which presented evidence
that the Gettier intuition was present across four cultures speaking
different languages: Brazil, India, Japan, and the USA.
Relatedly, a now well-replicated result in experimental epistemology
concerns laypersons’ judgments in “fake-barn” style
Gettier cases (e.g., Ginet 1975; Goldman 1976). In fake-barn cases,
referred to also as “environmental luck” cases by Duncan
Pritchard (2005, 2007, 2015), the unsafety of the subject’s
target belief is entirely down to her being situated in an
epistemically risky environment (e.g., an environment with near-by
error possibilities). Whereas a common position in mainstream
epistemology is that a belief falls short of knowledge provided it is
unsafe
—viz., if
too easily
the belief would
have been incorrect (see, e.g., Pritchard 2005, 2007; Engel 1992;
Luper-Foy 1984; Sainsbury 1997; Greco 2010; cf, however, Sosa 2007a,
2010; Hetherington 2013; Baumann 2014), studies in experimental
epistemology have pressed back against this orthodoxy. For example,
experiments by Colaço et al. (2014), Turri, Buckwalter, and
Blouw (2015), and Turri (2016b) reported that participants were more
inclined than not to attribute knowledge in fake barn cases (with a
majority of 80% of participants registering this view in Turri
2016b).
Experimental results in epistemology raise metaepistemological
questions. One such question concerns the extent to which facts about
our patterns of using “knows” should inform
epistemological theory (see
§3.2
).
 Another related metaepistemological question of relevance here asks
what the role of
intuition
is in epistemological theorizing;
this bears relevance to the extent that experimental results purport
to be testing folk (and expert) intuitions about cases. A third
metaepistemological question experimental results in epistemology
encourage concerns the comparative
weight
we should give to
folk judgments about cases. A well-known position on this
question—viz., the
expertise reply
—(e.g.,
Williamson 2011; Ludwig 2007; Kauppinen 2007) maintains that
philosophers’ judgments about cases will plausibly be more
reliable than those of laypersons, given that the former’s
training would lead them to be more sensitive to nuances of the cases
assessed, as well as to be less likely to be less susceptible to
irrelevant distorting effects (Egler & Ross 2020: 1079). For
criticism of the expertise defense, see e.g., Machery (2015) and
Mizrahi (2015).
Bibliography
Ahlstrom-Vij, Kristoffer, 2013, “Moderate Epistemic
Expressivism”,
Philosophical Studies
, 163(2):
337–357. doi:10.1007/s11098-011-9818-y
–––, 2018, “The Costs of Epistemic
Realism”, in
Metaepistemology
, Conor McHugh, Jonathan
Way, and Daniel Whiting (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
9–26. doi:10.1093/oso/9780198805366.001.0001
Alfano, Mark, J. Adam Carter, and Marc Cheong, 2018,
“Technological Seduction and Self-Radicalization”,
Journal of the American Philosophical Association
, 4(3):
298–322. doi:10.1017/apa.2018.27
Amico, Robert P., 1988, “Reply to Chisholm on the Problem of
the Criterion”,
Philosophical Papers
, 17(3):
235–236. doi:10.1080/05568648809506303
–––, 1993,
The Problem of the
Criterion
, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Baehr, Jason, 2006, “Character, Reliability and Virtue
Epistemology”,
The Philosophical Quarterly
, 56(223):
193–212. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9213.2006.00437.x
–––, 2011,
The Inquiring Mind: On
Intellectual Virtues and Virtue Epistemology
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199604074.001.0001
Baghramian, Maria and J. Adam Carter, 2015 [2021],
“Relativism”, in
The Stanford Encyclopedia of
Philosophy
(Spring 2021 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2021/entries/relativism/
>
Balcerak Jackson, Magdalena, 2013, “Conceptual Analysis and
Epistemic Progress”,
Synthese
, 190(15):
3053–3074. doi:10.1007/s11229-012-0120-0
Battaly, Heather D., 2015,
Virtue
, Malden, MA: Polity
Press.
–––, 2018, “A Third Kind of Intellectual
Virtue: Personalism”, in
The Routledge Handbook of Virtue
Epistemology
, Heather Battaly (ed.), New York: Routledge, pp.
115–126.
Baumann, Peter, 2014, “No Luck With Knowledge? On a Dogma of
Epistemology”,
Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research
, 89(3): 523–551.
doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2012.00622.x
Beaney, Michael, 2003 [2021], “Analysis”, in
The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Summer 2021 edition), Edward
N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2021/entries/analysis/
>
Beebe, James R., 2010, “Experimental Epistemology”, in
The Continuum Companion to Epistemology
, Andrew Cullison
(ed.), New York: Continuum, pp. 248–269.
–––, 2016, “Experimental
Epistemology”, in
Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy
,
London: Routledge. doi:10.4324/9780415249126-P067-1
Beebe, James R. and Jake Monaghan, 2018, “Epistemic Closure
in Folk Epistemology”, in
Oxford Studies in Experimental
Philosophy, Volume 2
, Tania Lombrozo, Joshua Knobe, and Shaun
Nichols (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 38–70.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780198815259.003.0003
Blackburn, Simon, 1993,
Essays in Quasi-Realism
, New
York: Oxford University Press.
–––, 1996, “Securing the Nots: Moral
Epistemology for the Quasi-Realist”, in
Moral Knowledge? New
Readings in Moral Epistemology
, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong and Mark
Timmons (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp.
82–100.
Boghossian, Paul, 2001, “How Are Objective Epistemic Reasons
Possible?”,
Philosophical Studies
, 106(1/2):
1–40. doi:10.1023/A:1013141719930
–––, 2006,
Fear of Knowledge: Against
Relativism and Constructivism
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199287185.001.0001
Buchak, Lara, 2014, “Belief, Credence, and Norms”,
Philosophical Studies
, 169(2): 285–311.
doi:10.1007/s11098-013-0182-y
Buckwalter, Wesley, 2010, “Knowledge Isn’t Closed on
Saturday: A Study in Ordinary Language”,
Review of
Philosophy and Psychology
, 1(3): 395–406.
doi:10.1007/s13164-010-0030-3
–––, 2012, “Non-Traditional Factors in
Judgments about Knowledge: Knowledge Judgments”,
Philosophy
Compass
, 7(4): 278–289.
doi:10.1111/j.1747-9991.2011.00466.x
Carter, J. Adam, 2016,
Metaepistemology and Relativism
,
London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. doi:10.1057/9781137336644
–––, forthcoming, “Review of
Epistemic
Values
by Linda Zagzebski”,
Philosophical
Review
.
Carter, J. Adam and Matthew Chrisman, 2012, “Is Epistemic
Expressivism Incompatible with Inquiry?”,
Philosophical
Studies
, 159(3): 323–339.
doi:10.1007/s11098-011-9710-9
Carter, J. Adam, Benjamin W. Jarvis, and Katherine Rubin, 2016,
“Belief without Credence”,
Synthese
, 193(8):
2323–2351. doi:10.1007/s11229-015-0846-6
Carter, J. Adam and Robin McKenna, 2021, “Absolutism,
Relativism and Metaepistemology”,
Erkenntnis
, 86(5):
1139–1159. doi:10.1007/s10670-019-00147-w
Carter, J. Adam, Duncan Pritchard, and Joshua Shepherd, 2019,
“Knowledge-How, Understanding-Why and Epistemic Luck: An
Experimental Study”,
Review of Philosophy and
Psychology
, 10(4): 701–734.
doi:10.1007/s13164-018-0429-9
Cassam, Quassim, 2007,
The Possibility of Knowledge
,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199208319.001.0001
–––, 2019,
Vices of the Mind: From the
Intellectual to the Political
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780198826903.001.0001
–––, 2020, “The Metaphysical Foundations
of Vice Epistemology”, in
Vice Epistemology
, Ian James
Kidd, Heather Battaly, and Quassim Cassam (eds.), London: Routledge,
pp. 37–52.
Chisholm, Roderick M., 1973,
The Problem of the
Criterion
, Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University Press.
–––, 1977,
Theory of Knowledge
,
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Chrisman, Matthew, 2007, “From Epistemic Contextualism to
Epistemic Expressivism”,
Philosophical Studies
, 135(2):
225–254. doi:10.1007/s11098-005-2012-3
–––, 2012, “Epistemic Expressivism”,
Philosophy Compass
, 7(2): 118–126.
doi:10.1111/j.1747-9991.2011.00465.x
Cling, Andrew D., 1994, “Posing the Problem of the
Criterion”,
Philosophical Studies
, 75(3):
261–292. doi:10.1007/BF00989584
Colaço, David, Wesley Buckwalter, Stephen Stich, and
Edouard Machery, 2014, “Epistemic Intuitions in Fake-Barn
Thought Experiments”,
Episteme
, 11(2): 199–212.
doi:10.1017/epi.2014.7
Côté-Bouchard, Charles and Clayton Littlejohn, 2018,
“Knowledge, Reasons, and Errors About Error Theory”, in
Metaepistemology
, Christos Kyriacou and Robin McKenna (eds.),
Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 147–171.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-93369-6_7
Cuneo, Terence, 2007,
The Normative Web: An Argument for Moral
Realism
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199218837.001.0001
Cuneo, Terence and Russ Shafer-Landau, 2014, “The Moral
Fixed Points: New Directions for Moral Nonnaturalism”,
Philosophical Studies
, 171(3): 399–443.
doi:10.1007/s11098-013-0277-5
DeRose, Keith, 1992, “Contextualism and Knowledge
Attributions”,
Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research
, 52(4): 913–929. doi:10.2307/2107917
–––, 2009,
The Case for Contextualism:
Knowledge, Skepticism, and Context, Volume 1
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199564460.001.0001
Easwaran, Kenny, 2016, “Dr. Truthlove or: How I Learned to
Stop Worrying and Love Bayesian Probabilities”,
Noûs
, 50(4): 816–853. doi:10.1111/nous.12099
Egler, Miguel and Lewis D. Ross, 2020, “Philosophical
Expertise under the Microscope”,
Synthese
, 197(3):
1077–1098. doi:10.1007/s11229-018-1757-0
Engel, Mylan, 1992, “Is Epistemic Luck Compatible with
Knowledge?”,
The Southern Journal of Philosophy
, 30(2):
59–75. doi:10.1111/j.2041-6962.1992.tb01715.x
Feltz, Adam and Chris Zarpentine, 2010, “Do You Know More
When It Matters Less?”,
Philosophical Psychology
,
23(5): 683–706. doi:10.1080/09515089.2010.514572
Field, Hartry, 1996, “The A Prioricity of Logic”,
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
, 96: 359–380.
doi:10.1093/aristotelian/96.1.359
–––, 1998, “Epistemological Nonfactualism
and the A Prioricity of Logic”,
Philosophical Studies
,
92(1/2): 1–24. doi:10.1023/A:1017147216094
Finlay, Stephen, 2008, “The Error in the Error
Theory”,
Australasian Journal of Philosophy
, 86(3):
347–369. doi:10.1080/00048400802001921
Friedman, Jane, 2020, “The Epistemic and the Zetetic”,
The Philosophical Review
, 129(4): 501–536.
doi:10.1215/00318108-8540918
–––, forthcoming, “Zetetic
Epistemology”, in
Towards an Expansive Epistemology: Norms,
Action, and the Social Sphere
, Baron Reed and A. K. Flowerree,
Routledge.
Fumerton, Richard A., 1995,
Metaepistemology and
Skepticism
, Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.
–––, 2008, “The Problem of the
Criterion”, in
Oxford Handbook of Skepticism
, John
Greco (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 34–52.
doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780195183214.003.0003
Gerken, Mikkel and James R. Beebe, 2016, “Knowledge in and
out of Contrast”,
Noûs
, 50(1): 133–164.
doi:10.1111/nous.12064
Gettier, Edmund L., 1963, “Is Justified True Belief
Knowledge?”,
Analysis
, 23(6): 121–123.
doi:10.1093/analys/23.6.121
Gibbard, Allan, 2003,
Thinking How to Live
, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Ginet, Carl, 1975,
Knowledge, Perception, and Memory
,
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Goldman, Alvin I., 1976, “Discrimination and Perceptual
Knowledge”,
The Journal of Philosophy
, 73(20):
771–791. doi:10.2307/2025679
Greco, Dan, 2015, “How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love
Probability 1”,
Philosophical Perspectives
, 29(1):
179–201.
Greco, John, 2010,
Achieving Knowledge: A Virtue-Theoretic
Account of Epistemic Normativity
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511844645
Grice, H. Paul, 1989,
Studies in the Way of Words
,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Hacking, Ian, 1982, “Language, Truth and Reason”, in
Rationality and Relativism
, Martin Hollis and Steven Lukes
(eds), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp. 48–66.
Harman, Gilbert, 1975, “Moral Relativism Defended”,
The Philosophical Review
, 84(1): 3–22.
doi:10.2307/2184078
Heller, Mark, 1999, “The Proper Role for Contextualism in an
Anti-Luck Epistemology”,
Philosophical Perspectives
,
13: 115–129. doi:10.1111/0029-4624.33.s13.5
Hetherington, Stephen, 2013, “Knowledge Can Be Lucky”,
in
Contemporary Debates in Epistemology
, second edition,
Matthias Steup, John Turri, and Ernest Sosa (eds.), (Contemporary
Debates in Philosophy 14), Chichester: Wiley Blackwell, pp.
164–176.
Holton, Richard, 2008, “Partial Belief, Partial
Intention”,
Mind
, 117(465): 27–58.
doi:10.1093/mind/fzn002
Horvath, Joachim and Steffen Koch, 2021, “Experimental
Philosophy and the Method of Cases”,
Philosophy
Compass
, 16(1): art. e12716. doi:10.1111/phc3.12716
Hyun, Alexander and Eric Sampson, 2014, “On Believing the
Error Theory”,
Journal of Philosophy
, 111(11):
631–640. doi:10.5840/jphil20141111140
Ichikawa, Jonathan Jenkins and Matthias Steup, 2012 [2018],
“The Analysis of Knowledge”, in
The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Summer 2018 edition), Edward N. Zalta
(ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2018/entries/knowledge-analysis/
>
Jackson, Elizabeth G., 2020, “The Relationship between
Belief and Credence”,
Philosophy Compass
, 15(6): art.
e12668. doi:10.1111/phc3.12668
–––, forthcoming, “On the Independence of
Belief and Credence”,
Philosophical Perspectives
.
Jackson, Frank, 1977,
Perception: A Representative
Theory
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 1998,
From Metaphysics to Ethics: A
Defence of Conceptual Analysis
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
doi:10.1093/0198250614.001.0001
Jeffrey, Richard C., 1970, “Dracula Meets Wolfman:
Acceptance vs. Partial Belief”, in
Induction, Acceptance and
Rational Belief
, Marshall Swain (ed.), Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands, pp. 157–185. doi:10.1007/978-94-010-3390-9_8
Jenkins, C. S., 2008, “A Priori Knowledge: Debates and
Developments”,
Philosophy Compass
, 3(3): 436–450.
doi:10.1111/j.1747-9991.2008.00136.x
Kappel, Klemens, 2011, “Is Epistemic Expressivism
Dialectically Incoherent?”,
Dialectica
, 65(1):
49–69. doi:10.1111/j.1746-8361.2011.01260.x
Kauppinen, Antti, 2007, “The Rise and Fall of Experimental
Philosophy”,
Philosophical Explorations
, 10(2):
95–118. doi:10.1080/13869790701305871
Kelp, Christoph, 2021a,
Inquiry, Knowledge, and
Understanding
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780192896094.001.0001
–––, 2021b, “Theory of Inquiry”,
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
, 103(2):
359–384. doi:10.1111/phpr.12719
Knobe, Joshua and Shaun Nichols, 2017, “Experimental
Philosophy”, in
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2017 edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2017/entries/experimental-philosophy/
>
Kölbel, Max, 2004, “Faultless Disagreement”,
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
, 104: 53–73.
doi:10.1111/j.0066-7373.2004.00081.x
Kuhn, Thomas S., 1962,
The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Kusch, Martin, 2009, “Epistemic Replacement Relativism
Defended”, in
EPSA Epistemology and Methodology of
Science
, Mauricio Suárez, Mauro Dorato, and Miklós
Rédei (eds.), Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.
165–175. doi:10.1007/978-90-481-3263-8_14
Kvanvig, Jonathan L., 2003,
The Value of Knowledge and the
Pursuit of Understanding
, New York: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511498909
Kyriacou, Christos, 2018, “From
Moral
Fixed Points
to
Epistemic
Fixed Points”, in
Metaepistemology
, Christos Kyriacou and Robin McKenna (eds.),
Cham: Springer International Publishing, pp. 71–95.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-93369-6_4
Lackey, Jennifer, 2000, “Rationality, Defeaters, and
Testimony”, PhD Thesis, Brown University.
Laudan, Larry, 1990, “Demystifying
Underdetermination”, in
Scientific Theories
, C. Wade
Savage (ed.), Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, pp.
267–297.
Lee, Matthew Brandon and Paul Silva, 2022, “Toward a Lockean
Unification of Formal and Traditional Epistemology”,
Episteme,
19(1): 111–129. doi:10.1017/epi.2020.11
Lewis, David, 1986,
On the Plurality of Worlds
, New York:
Blackwell.
Lillehammer, Hallvard and Niklas Möller, 2015, “We Can
Believe the Error Theory”,
Ethical Theory and Moral
Practice
, 18(3): 453–459.
doi:10.1007/s10677-014-9532-x
Littlejohn, Clayton and J. Adam Carter, 2021,
This Is
Epistemology: An Introduction
, (This Is Philosophy), Hoboken, NJ:
Wiley-Blackwell.
Ludwig, Kirk, 2007, “The Epistemology of Thought
Experiments: First Person versus Third Person Approaches”,
Midwest Studies in Philosophy
, 31(1): 128–159.
doi:10.1111/j.1475-4975.2007.00160.x
Luper-Foy, Steven, 1984, “The Epistemic Predicament:
Knowledge, Nozickian Tracking, and Scepticism”,
Australasian
Journal of Philosophy
, 62(1): 26–49.
doi:10.1080/00048408412341241
Lynch, Michael P., 2009, “Truth, Value and Epistemic
Expressivism”,
Philosophy and Phenomenological
Research
, 79(1): 76–97.
doi:10.1111/j.1933-1592.2009.00267.x
MacFarlane, John, 2005, “The Assessment Sensitivity of
Knowledge Attributions”, in
Oxford Studies in Epistemology,
Volume 1
, Tamar Szabo Gendler and John Hawthorne (eds.), Oxford:
Oxford University Press, pp. 197–234.
–––, 2008a, “Boghossian, Bellarmine, and
Bayes”,
Philosophical Studies
, 141(3): 391–398.
doi:10.1007/s11098-008-9281-6
–––, 2008b, “The Assessment Sensitivity of
Knowledge Attributions” in
Epistemology: an Anthology,
Ernesa Sosa, Jaegwon Kim, Jeremy Fantl, and Matthew McGrath
(eds.), Chicago: John Wiley&Sons, pp. 779–800.
–––, 2011, “Relativism and Knowledge
Attributions”, in
The Routledge Companion to
Epistemology
, Duncan Pritchard and Sven Bernecker (eds.), New
York: Routledge, pp. 536–544.
–––, 2014,
Assessment Sensitivity: Relative
Truth and Its Applications
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199682751.001.0001
Machery, Edouard, 2015, “The Illusion of Expertise”,
in
Experimental Philosophy, Rationalism, and Naturalism
,
Eugen Fischer and John Collins (eds.), London: Routledge, pp.
188–203. doi:10.4324/9781315714196
Machery, Edouard, Stephen Stich, David Rose, Amita Chatterjee,
Kaori Karasawa, Noel Struchiner, Smita Sirker, Naoki Usui, and Takaaki
Hashimoto, 2017, “Gettier Across Cultures 1”,
Noûs
, 51(3): 645–664. doi:10.1111/nous.12110
May, Joshua, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, Jay G. Hull, and Aaron
Zimmerman, 2010, “Practical Interests, Relevant Alternatives,
and Knowledge Attributions: An Empirical Study”,
Review of
Philosophy and Psychology
, 1(2): 265–273.
doi:10.1007/s13164-009-0014-3
Miller, Alexander, 2002 [2021], “Realism”, in
The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2021 edition), Edward
N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2021/entries/realism/
>
Mizrahi, Moti, 2015, “Three Arguments Against the Expertise
Defense”,
Metaphilosophy
, 46(1): 52–64.
doi:10.1111/meta.12115
Moon, Andrew, 2018, “The Nature of Doubt and a New Puzzle
about Belief, Doubt, and Confidence”,
Synthese
, 195(4):
1827–1848. doi:10.1007/s11229-016-1310-y
Moon, Andrew and Elizabeth Jackson, 2020, “Credence: A
Belief-First Approach”,
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
,
50(5): 652–669. doi:10.1017/can.2020.9
Olson, Jonas, 2011, “Error Theory and Reasons for
Belief”, in
Reasons for Belief
, Andrew Reisner and
Asbjorn Steglich-Petersen (eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, pp. 75–93. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511977206.006
–––, 2014,
Moral Error Theory: History,
Critique, Defence
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198701934.001.0001
–––, 2016, “On the Defensibility and
Believability of Moral Error Theory: Reply to Evers, Streumer, and
Toppinen”,
Journal of Moral Philosophy
, 13(4):
461–473. doi:10.1163/17455243-01304005
Pettigrew, Richard, 2016,
Accuracy and the Laws of
Credence
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198732716.001.0001
Plakias, Alexandra, 2019, “Publishing without Belief”,
Analysis
, 79(4): 638–646.
doi:10.1093/analys/anz040
Pollock, John L., 1987, “Defeasible Reasoning”,
Cognitive Science
, 11(4): 481–518.
doi:10.1207/s15516709cog1104_4
Pritchard, Duncan, 2005,
Epistemic Luck
, Oxford:
Clarendon Press. doi:10.1093/019928038X.001.0001
–––, 2007, “Anti-Luck Epistemology”,
Synthese
, 158(3): 277–297.
doi:10.1007/s11229-006-9039-7
–––, 2015, “Anti-Luck Epistemology and the
Gettier Problem”,
Philosophical Studies
, 172(1):
93–111. doi:10.1007/s11098-014-0374-0
Putnam, Hilary, 1981,
Reason, Truth and History
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511625398
Richard, Mark, 2004, “Contextualism and Relativism”,
Philosophical Studies
, 119(1/2): 215–242.
doi:10.1023/B:PHIL.0000029358.77417.df
Ridge, Michael, 2007, “Epistemology for Ecumenical
Expressivists”,
Aristotelian Society Supplementary
Volume
, 81: 83–108.
doi:10.1111/j.1467-8349.2007.00152.x
Rorty, Richard, 1979,
Philosophy and the Mirror of
Nature
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
–––, 1989,
Contingency, Irony, and
Solidarity
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511804397
Rowland, Richard, 2012, “Moral Error Theory and the Argument
from Epistemic Reasons”,
Journal of Ethics and Social
Philosophy
, 7(1): 1–25. doi:10.26556/jesp.v7i1.69
Sainsbury, Richard M., 1997, “Easy Possibilities”,
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
, 57(4):
907–919. doi:10.2307/2953809
Searle, John R., 1969,
Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy
of Language
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139173438
Shafer-Landau, Russ, 2003,
Moral Realism: A Defence
,
Oxford: Clarendon Press. doi:10.1093/0199259755.001.0001
Shah, Nishi, 2010, “The Limits of Normative
Detachment”,
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
,
110(3): 347–371. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9264.2010.00290.x
Shope, Robert K., 1983,
The Analysis of Knowing: A Decade of
Research
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Sosa, Ernest, 1980, “The Raft and the Pyramid: Coherence
versus Foundations in the Theory of Knowledge”,
Midwest
Studies in Philosophy
, 5: 3–25.
doi:10.1111/j.1475-4975.1980.tb00394.x
–––, 2007a,
A Virtue Epistemology: Apt
Belief and Reflective Knowledge, Volume I
, Oxford: Clarendon
Press. doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199297023.001.0001
–––, 2007b, “Experimental Philosophy and
Philosophical Intuition”,
Philosophical Studies
,
132(1): 99–107. doi:10.1007/s11098-006-9050-3
–––, 2008, “Boghossian’s Fear of
Knowledge”,
Philosophical Studies
, 141(3):
399–407. doi:10.1007/s11098-008-9282-5
–––, 2009,
Reflective Knowledge: Apt Belief
and Reflective Knowledge, Volume II
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199217250.001.0001
–––, 2010, “How Competence Matters in
Epistemology”,
Philosophical Perspectives
, 24:
465–475. doi:10.1111/j.1520-8583.2010.00200.x
–––, 2015,
Judgment and Agency
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198719694.001.0001
–––, 2017,
Epistemology
, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
–––, 2021,
Epistemic Explanations: A Theory
of Telic Normativity, and What It Explains
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780198856467.001.0001
Sosa, Ernest, Jeremy Fantl, and Matthew McGrath (eds.), 2019,
Contemporary Epistemology: An Anthology
, (Blackwell
Philosophy Anthologies 41), Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Staffel, Julia, 2019, “How Do Beliefs Simplify
Reasoning?”,
Noûs
, 53(4): 937–962.
doi:10.1111/nous.12254
Stanley, Jason, 2005,
Knowledge and Practical Interests
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/0199288038.001.0001
Streumer, Bart, 2008, “Are There Irreducibly Normative
Properties?”,
Australasian Journal of Philosophy
,
86(4): 537–561. doi:10.1080/00048400802215349
–––, 2013, “Can We Believe the Error
Theory?”,
Journal of Philosophy
, 110(4): 194–212.
doi:10.5840/jphil2013110431
–––, 2016, “Why Jonas Olson Cannot Believe
the Error Theory Either”,
Journal of Moral Philosophy
,
13(4): 419–436. doi:10.1163/17455243-01304003
–––, 2017,
Unbelievable Errors: An Error
Theory About All Normative Judgments
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780198785897.001.0001
Sturgeon, Scott, 2020,
The Rational Mind
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press. doi:10.1093/oso/9780198845799.001.0001
Tanesini, Alessandra, 2021,
The Mismeasure of the Self: A
Study in Vice Epistemology
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780198858836.001.0001
Turri, John, 2016a, “How to Do Better: Toward Normalizing
Experimentation in Epistemology”, in
Advances in
Experimental Philosophy and Philosophical Methodology
, Jennifer
Nado (ed.), London: Bloomsbury Academic, pp. 35–51.
–––, 2016b, “Knowledge Judgments in
‘Gettier’ Cases”, in
A Companion to Experimental
Philosophy
, Justin Sytsma and Wesley Buckwalter (eds.),
Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, pp. 335–348.
doi:10.1002/9781118661666.ch23
–––, 2018, “Experimental Epistemology and
‘Gettier’ Cases”, in
The Gettier Problem
,
Stephen Hetherington (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.
199–217. doi:10.1017/9781316827413.014
Turri, John, Wesley Buckwalter, and Peter Blouw, 2015,
“Knowledge and Luck”,
Psychonomic Bulletin &
Review
, 22(2): 378–390. doi:10.3758/s13423-014-0683-5
Vahid, Hamid, 2005, “The Problem of the Criterion”, in
his
Epistemic Justification and the Skeptical Challenge
,
London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp. 85–97.
doi:10.1057/9780230596214_5
Van Cleve, James, 1979, “Foundationalism, Epistemic
Principles, and the Cartesian Circle”,
The Philosophical
Review
, 88(1): 55–91. doi:10.2307/2184779
Wedgwood, Ralph, 2012, “Outright Belief”,
Dialectica
, 66(3): 309–329.
Weatherson, Brian, 2005, “Can We Do Without Pragmatic
Encroachment?”
Philosophical Perspectives
, 19(1):
417–443.
Weinberg, Jonathan M., Shaun Nichols, and Stephen Stich, 2001,
“Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions”,
Philosophical
Topics
, 29(1/2): 429–460.
doi:10.5840/philtopics2001291/217
Weisberg, Jonathan, 2020, “Belief In Psyontology”,
Philosopher’s Imprint
, 20: art. 11.
 [
Weisberg 2020 available online
]
Williamson, Timothy, 2000,
Knowledge and Its Limits
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/019925656X.001.0001
–––, 2007,
The Philosophy of
Philosophy
, Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
doi:10.1002/9780470696675
–––, 2011, “Philosophical Expertise and
the Burden of Proof”,
Metaphilosophy
, 42(3):
215–229. doi:10.1111/j.1467-9973.2011.01685.x
–––, 2014, “How Did We Get Here from
There? The Transformation of Analytic Philosophy”,
Belgrade
Philosophical Annual
, 27: 7–37.
doi:10.5937/BPA1427007W
–––, 2018,
Doing Philosophy: From Common
Curiosity to Logical Reasoning
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wright, Crispin, 2008, “Fear of Relativism?”,
Philosophical Studies
, 141(3): 379–390.
doi:10.1007/s11098-008-9280-7
Zagzebski, Linda Trinkaus, 1996,
Virtues of the Mind: An
Inquiry into the Nature of Virtue and the Ethical Foundations of
Knowledge
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139174763
–––, 2020,
Epistemic Values: Collected
Papers in Epistemology
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780197529171.001.0001
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
McCain, Kevin, 2014,
 “
Problem of the Criterion
”,
 in
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy
.
Related Entries
abilities
|
analysis
|
Berkeley, George
|
Chisholm, Roderick
|
contextualism, epistemic
|
Descartes, René: epistemology
|
epistemology
|
epistemology: Bayesian
|
Hume, David
|
idealism
|
justification, epistemic: foundationalist theories of
|
justification, epistemic: internalist vs. externalist conceptions of
|
knowledge: analysis of
|
meaning, theories of
|
metaethics
|
moral anti-realism
|
moral realism
|
perception: the problem of
|
postmodernism
|
realism
|
relativism
|
Rorty, Richard
|
understanding