Personal Autonomy
First published Tue May 28, 2002; substantive revision Thu Feb 15, 2018
Autonomous agents are self-governing agents. But what is a
self-governing agent?  Governing oneself is no guarantee that one will
have a greater range of options in the future, or the sort of
opportunities one most wants to have.  Since, moreover, a person can
govern herself without being able to appreciate the difference between
right and wrong, it seems that an autonomous agent can do something
wrong without being to blame for her action. What, then, are the
necessary and sufficient features of this self-relation?  Philosophers
have offered a wide range of competing answers to this question.
1. Introduction
2. Four More or Less Overlapping Accounts of Personal Autonomy
3. Challenges to Identifying the Minimal Conditions of Personal Autonomy
4. Agents as Causes and the Practical Point of View
5. Conclusion
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Introduction
When people living in some region of the world declare that their
group has the right to live autonomously, they are saying that they
ought to be allowed to govern themselves. In making this claim, they
are, in essence, rejecting the political and legal authority of those
not in their group. They are insisting that whatever power these
outsiders may have over them, this power is illegitimate; they, and
they alone, have the authority to determine and enforce the rules and
policies that govern their lives.
When an individual makes a similar declaration about some sphere of
her own life, she, too, is denying that anyone else has the authority
to control her activity within this sphere; she is saying that any
exercise of power over this activity is illegitimate unless she
authorizes it herself. Most of the reasons that can be offered in
support of this claim have correlates in the case of demands for group
autonomy. But there is one very important exception: a reason that
takes us beyond politics, to the metaphysics of agency.
An agent is one who acts. In order to act, one must initiate one’s
action. And one cannot initiate one’s action without exercising one’s
power to do so. Since nothing and no one has the power to act except
the agent herself, she alone is entitled to exercise this power, if she
is entitled to act. This means that insofar as someone is an agent,
i.e., insofar as she is one who acts—she is correct to regard
her own commitments to acting, her own judgments and decisions about
how she should act, as authoritative. Indeed, if she were to challenge
the authority that is an essential feature of her judgments and
decisions, then they would cease to be her own practical conclusions.
Their power to move her would cease to be a manifestation of her power
to move herself; it would not be the power of her own agency.
In short, every agent has an authority over herself that is
grounded, not in her political or social role, nor in any law or
custom, but in the simple fact that she alone can initiate her actions.
To be sure, it might be unwise for someone to follow the commands she
gives to herself when she “makes up her mind.” The point,
however, is that she has no conceivable option. In order to form an
intention to do one thing rather than another, an agent must regard her
own judgment about how to act as authoritative—even if it is
only the judgment that she should follow the command or advice of
someone else. This tight connection between being an agent and having
authority has no correlate in cases where the authority at issue is
political. Anyone can coherently (and often plausibly) challenge the
political authority of some individual or group. Even a political
leader herself can with good reason believe that her political power is
illegitimate, and that exercising this power is unjustified.
Despite the special inalienable nature of our authority over
ourselves, it is possible for us to fail to govern ourselves, just as
it is possible for a political leader to fail to govern those who fall
within her domain. Indeed, precisely because our authority over our own
actions is an intrinsic feature of our agency, our deference to this
authority is but the
form
of self-government. It is no guarantee that
whenever we act, the forces that move us owe
their
power to
our
power to decide what to do. Just as a political leader’s
official status is compatible with her having no real power to call the
shots, so too, a person can have an authoritative status with respect
to her motives without having any real power over them. Though it is an
agent’s job to determine how she will act, she can do this job without
really being in control. Of course, no one can govern herself without
being subject to influences whose power does not derive from her own
authority: everything we do is a response to past and present
circumstances over which we have no control. But some of the forces
that move us to act do not merely affect which actions we choose to
perform, nor how we govern ourselves in making these choices. They
influence us in a way that makes a mockery of our authority to
determine our own actions. They undermine our autonomy.
What distinguishes autonomy-undermining influences on a person’s
decision, intention, or will from those motivating forces that merely
play a role in the self-governing process? This is the question that
all accounts of autonomy try to answer. As the number and variety of
these accounts indicate, the distinction is extremely elusive. There is
certainly widespread agreement about the paradigm threats to personal
autonomy: brainwashing and addiction are the favorite examples in the
philosophical literature. But philosophers seem unable to reach a
consensus about the precise nature of these threats. They cannot agree
about how it is that certain influences on our behavior prevent us from
governing ourselves.
This disagreement about the defining characteristics of autonomous
agency reflects the fact that even as concrete examples appear to call
attention to a very real difference between those who govern themselves
and those who do not, there are significant conceptual obstacles to
making sense of this distinction. These obstacles are tied to the very
feature of agency mentioned above—the feature that appears to
support the demand that individuals be granted considerable political
and legal power. If an agent fails to govern herself when she acts,
this must be because what she does is independent of her power to
determine how she will act. But if she necessarily has the authority to
determine how she will act, and if this essential feature of agency is
inseparable from the fact that she necessarily defers to herself
whenever she initiates her action, then how can her behavior possibly
escape her control? Intuitively, an agent can fall under the sway of
desires, or urges, or compulsions whose power is at odds with her own
power as an agent; she can be moved by such impulses “in spite of
herself.” But in what sense, exactly, are such motives
“external” to the agent herself? How can
their
power to move her fail to be a manifestation of
her
power to
act? How can their power reduce her authorization of her action to a
mere formality? It is difficult to answer these questions when the
governing agent and the agent she governs are one and the same.
(Again, the perplexity to which these questions give voice does not
have a correlate in the political case. We can easily grasp the idea of
a country’s army (or legislative body, or cabinet ministers) dictating
to the president what legislation he must approve; for in this case
there are (at least) two independently identifiable 
decision-makers—each with its own point of view, each with its own power. The
difficulty in the case where the relevant powers are all within the
psyche of a single individual agent is that there is no such
independently identifiable pair of standpoints in terms of which we can
distinguish the powers that bully this agent from the powers that can
be attributed to the agent herself. An account of the conditions under
which an individual agent is bullied by her motives is, at the same
time, an account of what makes a motive external to the agent’s own
standpoint.)
2. Four More or Less Overlapping Accounts of Personal Autonomy
Philosophers have proposed many different accounts of the autonomous
agent’s special relation to her own motives. According to one
prominent conception, which one might call
“
coherentist
,” an agent governs her own action if
and only if she is motivated to act as she does because this
motivation coheres with (is in harmony with) some mental state that
represents her point of view on the action.  The relevant mental state
varies from account to account. According to one popular story, an
agent’s point of view is constituted by her highest-order desires
regarding which of her first-order desires moves her to
act. (Frankfurt
 1988c)
[
1
]
According to another story, her point of
view is constituted by her (contemporaneous or long-term) evaluative
judgments regarding which actions are (most) worth performing. (Watson
 1975)
[
2
]
Still
another account adds that there must also be harmony between what the
agent does and her more or less long-term plans (Bratman 1979 and
2007).  And others appeal to the relatively stable network of
emotional states constitutive of “caring” (Frankfurt 1988f
and 1999d, Jaworska, Shoemaker
 2003)
[
3
]
or to the agent’s character traits
(Dworkin, R.), or to her most thoroughly “integrated”
psychological states (Arpaly and Schroeder).
All these accounts reflect the intuition that an action cannot be
attributed to the agent herself if, even as she performs this action,
she occupies a point of view from which she repudiates what she is
doing. More carefully, such an action cannot be the agent’s doing in
the way that it must be if it is to qualify as an instance of
self-government. According to this intuition, if someone repudiates,
or in some other way dissociates herself from, the causal efficacy of
her own motives, then the power of these motives is independent of her
authority. If, on the other hand, she endorses these motives, whether
implicitly or explicitly, then her actions occur with her permission,
if not necessarily at her command. Under what conditions does someone
count as endorsing or repudiating her motives?  Each account offers a
different answer to this question.
Not only does there appear to be a tight conceptual connection between
self-governing agency and
synchronic
psychic unity; there
also appears to be a connection between self-governing agency and
the
diachronic
unity of one’s later self with one’s earlier
self. This is the connection central to accounts that identify
self-governing agents with agents constrained by plans, or by
well-integrated emotions, or traits of character. Agents persist
through time; and so, these accounts stress, an agent’s point of view
is not simply a function of whatever mental state(s) she happens to be
in at some point in time. Because an agent’s plans play a crucial role
in ensuring that she is more than a mere collection or sequence of
mental states, it is reasonable to think that whether her motives have
her support depends on whether they are constrained by these plans.
So, too, it is reasonable to think that her stance toward her motives
is determined by her long-term values and/or her relatively stable
commitments and cares.
On a strict coherentist conception of autonomy, autonomous agents can
be moved by desires they are helpless to resist: though an addict fails
to govern herself if she would rather resist her irresistible urge to
take drugs, she is an autonomous agent if she has no objection to her
addiction and its motivational effects. According to the coherentist,
moreover, both the origin and the content of a person’s higher-order
attitudes (evaluative judgments, plans) are irrelevant to whether she
is an autonomous agent. She need have done nothing to bring it about
that she has these attitudes; and the attitudes need not be especially
rational or well-informed. Coherentist accounts are thus doubly
internalist
. They express the intuition that whether we govern
ourselves depends on neither how we came to be who we are (a fact that
is prior to (and in this sense external to) the action itself) nor how
our beliefs and attitudes relate to reality (a fact that is independent
of (and in this sense external to) the beliefs and attitudes
themselves). In other words, on these accounts, there need be no special
relation between our autonomy-constituting attitudes and either the
past circumstances that caused these attitudes or the present
circumstances in response to which they move us to act.
Other accounts of autonomy introduce conditions that are
externalist
in one or both of these ways. According to those
who advocate a
reasons-responsive
conception of autonomous agency, an
agent does not really govern herself unless her motives, or the mental
processes that produce them, are responsive to a sufficiently wide
range of reasons for and against behaving as she
 does. (Fischer and Ravizza, Nelkin, 
 Wolf)
[
4
]
On accounts
of this type, an agent who is unresponsive to the reasons for
“standing behind,” or “backing up,” certain
motives and not others is not in the proper position to authorize her
own actions. Whether the relevant reasons are grounded in facts about
her own desires and interests, or whether they have some independent
source, the idea is that someone is not qualified to govern herself if
she cannot understand what she (really) has reason to do, or (if this
is a distinct handicap) is incapable of being moved by these reasons.
In effect, her exercise of authority is so ill-conceived that it is
powerless to confer legitimacy on her motives.
The feature of these accounts that most distinguishes them from
coherentist accounts is the importance they attribute to an agent’s
ability to appreciate the reasons she has. (Once she appreciates these
reasons, her inability to act accordingly is, essentially, the
inability to conform her act to her own judgment, and to her
corresponding (higher-order) desire.) What, exactly, is the connection
supposed to be between being out of touch with (evaluative and/or
nonevaluative) reality and failing to govern oneself? Clearly, a person
who fails to appreciate a wide range of reasons for action is unlikely
to govern herself
well
: she is likely to do things that will,
in the long run, thwart her own purposes and interests. The
reasons-responsiveness conception of autonomy thus appears to
reflect the intuition that when we do something very poorly, we do not
really do it at all. There is, however, another possible underlying
rationale for regarding ignorance as a threat to self-government. If
doing
Y
is constitutive of doing
Z
, then if I
authorize myself to be moved by the desire to do
Y
because I
mistakenly believe that doing
Y
is a way of
not
doing
Z
, then there is an obvious sense in which I have not
authorized myself to do what I am now doing when I am moved by the
desire to do
Y
. So, if I have a general desire to do what is
right and prudent, or, even more generally, a desire to do what I can
justify to myself (and others), or, more generally still, a desire to
be responsive to reasons, then insofar as I am moved to act in ways
that are, in fact, incompatible with satisfying these desires, there
is a sense in which I—who am committed to doing only what I
have good (enough) reason to do—have not really authorized my
action. Alternatively, we could say that, under these circumstances,
something external to my power to guide myself by reasons has
prevented me from exercising this power, and so has prevented me from
governing
 myself.
[
5
]
An additional source of support for the reasons-responsive
conception of autonomy comes from the thought that someone who cannot
respond to the reasons there are must have a limited ability to reason.
This brings us to a third popular approach to autonomous 
agency—an approach that stresses the importance of the reasoning process
 itself (Christman 1991, 1993 and Mele 1993,
 1995).
[
6
]
According to
responsiveness-to-reasoning
accounts, the essence of
self-government is the capacity to evaluate one’s motives on the basis
of whatever else one believes and desires, and to adjust these motives
in response to one’s evaluations. It is the capacity to discern what
“follows from” one’s beliefs and desires, and to act
accordingly. One can exercise this capacity despite holding false
beliefs of all kinds about what one has reason to do. Accordingly, on
these accounts, being autonomous is not the same thing as being guided
by correct evaluative and normative judgments.
The emphasis on an autonomous agent’s responsiveness to her own
reasoning reflects the intuition that someone whose education consisted
of a method of indoctrination that deprived her of the ability to call
her own attitudes into question would, in effect, be governed by her
“programmers,” not by herself. So, too, someone whose
practical reasoning was directly manipulated by others would not govern
herself by means of this reasoning. And so, it seems, she would have no
power over the motives that this reasoning produced.
Like the coherentists, advocates of responsiveness-to-reasoning
accounts believe that the key to autonomous agency is the ability to
distance oneself from one’s attitudes and beliefs—to occupy a
standpoint that is not constituted by whatever mental states are moving
one to act. They agree that motives authorized from this reflective
standpoint are internal to the agent herself in a way that her other
motives are not. Unlike the coherentists, however, the
reasoning-responsive theorists believe that there is more to the
capacity for self-reflection than the capacity to hold higher-order
attitudes. The authority of our higher-order attitudes is grounded,
they claim, in the authority of the practical reasoning that supports
these attitudes. So a self-governing agent does not merely endorse her
motives: her endorsements are implicit claims about which motives have
the support of her reason.
This fact is closely tied to another. Like many accounts that stress
an autonomous agent’s responsiveness to reasons, responsiveness-
to-reasoning accounts often suggest that self-government requires the
capacity for self-transformation. On this assumption, an autonomous
agent is someone who can change her mind when she discovers good reason
to do
 so.
[
7
]
In contrast, strict coherentists insist that
it is possible to act autonomously while being moved by desires that
are not only irresistible when they produce their effects, but so
integral to one’s identity that one could not possibly will to resist
them.
[
8
]
The conception of autonomous agency as responsiveness to reasoning
clearly has a more internalist character than the conception of
autonomous agency as responsiveness to reasons: according to those who
stress the autonomous agent’s ability to evaluate her own motives, what
counts is not the relation between the agent’s attitudes and external
reality, but her ability to draw inferences from what she wants and
believes, and by so doing, to reconsider—to rationally reflect
upon—her other desires and beliefs. Insofar, however, as a
responsiveness-to-reasoning account presupposes a particular conception
of practical reasoning, it appeals to standards, or principles, that
the agent herself might misapply, or fail to recognize altogether.
Moreover, even if advocates of autonomy as responsiveness-to-reasoning
have nothing in particular in mind when they speak of the process of
“reflection,” “rational evaluation,” etc.,
reasoning is a norm-governed process that an agent might reject for
reasons of her own. Responsiveness to reasoning accounts thus contain
an externalist element that is absent from strict coherentist accounts.
They imply that an agent can be mistaken about whether she is really
reasoning—and so can be mistaken about whether the power of her
motives reflects the fact that she has the authority to determine her
own actions.
This weak externalism naturally expands into more robust varieties.
In particular, it supports the idea that whether an agent’s reasoning
is really her way of governing her actions depends on which
forces exert a nonrational influence on this reasoning. Even when
indoctrination and other more or less imaginary forms of “mind
control” do not prevent a person from reaching evaluative
conclusions about her own motives, they can prevent her from thinking
for herself. So, too, it seems, someone in the grip of compulsion or
addiction can be so dominated by this condition that whatever facts she
considers, and whatever conclusions she draws, cannot legitimately be
attributed to her. One way to interpret these cases is to say that the
person’s reasoning falls so far short of the norms of “rational
reflection” that she is not really reasoning at all.
Alternatively, one can say that her reasoning does not guarantee her
autonomy because it is under the control of external forces.
Insofar as accounts of autonomy simply stipulate that certain
influences on an agent’s intention-forming process “interfere
with,” or “pervert,” this process, these accounts
are incomplete. For they leave it mysterious why certain influences,
and not others, are a threat to self-government. One response to this
challenge is offered by reasons-responsive accounts: according to this
response, the autonomy-undermining influences are the ones that
prevent the reasoning process from being sufficiently sensitive to the
reasons there
 are.
[
9
]
Another – compatible – response appeals to the
“relational” aspects of autonomy: other agents can prevent
someone’s reasoning from qualifying as a mode of self-government by
preventing the reasoner from developing the self-respect and/or
self-trust necessary for forming a point of view that is truly her
own (Benson 1994, 2000, Mackenzie and Stoljar, Anderson and 
 Honneth)
[
10
]
.
 If an agent’s point of view does not reflect her respect for
herself and for her ability to set her own ends and assess the reasons
relevant to pursuing some ends and not others, then the direction her
reasoning takes cannot be attributed to her.  (Though relational
accounts of autonomy highlight the extent to which an agent’s capacity
to govern herself depends on her interactions with other agents, it is
important to note that self-respect and self-trust can also be
undermined by experiences or psychological conditions that do not
involve the actions of anyone else.)
A fourth conception of personal autonomy offers a very different
response to the challenge of distinguishing (i) the determining causes
that prevent an agent from governing herself when she employs her
reason from (ii) the causes that determine how an agent governs
herself when she reasons.  According to this
incompatibilist
conception, each of these influences undermines the agent’s autonomy;
cases of mind control simply call our attention to the fact that
whenever our motives are causally determined by events over which we
have no control, their power does not reflect our
authority. (Pereboom) According to incompatibilists, if our actions
can be fully explained as the effects of causal powers that are
independent of us, then even if our beliefs and attitudes are among
these effects, we do not govern them, and so we do not govern
ourselves. (Kane 1996 and van Inwagen
1983)
[
11
]
Incompatibilist accounts of autonomy take many subtly different
forms. So do the three other (compatibilist) accounts mentioned here.
Some of the differences reflect disagreements over the extent to which
the relevant conditions—coherence among higher- and
lower-order attitudes, responsiveness to reasons, responsiveness to
reasoning, freedom from determination by external causes—must
actually obtain when an agent determines her will, or whether it is
enough that under certain specified circumstances the
agent
would
relate to her motives in the stipulated manner.
There is also a difference of opinion about the scope of the relevant
capacities: Must an autonomous agent be capable of responding to a
wide range of reasons for and against her action? or is it enough that
her motives are responsive to the “strongest,” “most
compelling” reasons? and can these reasons include the sort of
credible threats that figure in cases of coercion? What range of
attitudes must an autonomous agent be capable of calling into
question?  How well must she be capable of reasoning? Does it matter
whether she is guided by certain principles of rationality? Must it be
possible for her to draw different conclusions on the basis of the
reasons she considers? Is it essential that she could have considered
a different set of reasons instead?
There are even disagreements over whether the reasons to which
self-governing agents respond are, as most assume, practical
considerations concerning what to do, or what is worth doing. It has
been suggested that agents govern their actions by engaging in
theoretical reasoning to the end of forming beliefs about which modes
of behavior they could explain, given their desires. (Velleman) This suggestion
stresses the extent to which governing oneself involves deferring to
psychic demands whose power is independent of one’s authority. On this
picture, an agent exercises authority over what she does only once she
is faced with a set of possible actions, whose possibility reflects
their compatibility with the causal power of her desires: in predicting
that she will perform one of these actions, she authorizes this action,
and thereby strengthens her motives for performing
 it.
[
12
]
This way of interpreting the link between autonomous agency and
responsiveness to reasons raises larger questions about the
relationship between our practical impulses and our reason.  The
answers to these questions, and to those mentioned above can be
combined in many different ways.  Not only, moreover, can each
approach thus take a wide variety of forms, but the approaches
themselves can (and often do) figure together as necessary or
sufficient conditions in a single complex account.
3. Challenges to Identifying the Minimal Conditions of Personal Autonomy
All the proposals just considered contribute to our understanding
of the various roles that agents can play in their
own actions. They articulate various ideals that agents can realize to
various degrees when they act. In so doing, they shed light on how,
with the proper training, a very young child, whose deference to the
authority of her own judgments is little more than the
form
of
self-government, can develop into an exemplary self-governing agent.
This is a very important contribution. Nonetheless, it falls short
of giving us everything we have reason to expect from an account of
personal autonomy. In particular, challenges to the different
approaches sketched above suggest that they do not spell out the
minimal conditions under which a person’s exercise of authority over
how she behaves
reflects her own power to determine
how
she exercises this authority
. Minimal self-government seems to
require nothing more nor less than being the power behind whatever
reasoning directly gives rise to one’s behavior. Yet none of the
accounts we have canvassed here seems to capture this important, most
basic, form of self-government. Nor, it seems, does any combination of
these accounts.
The worry that the coherence of one’s contemporaneous attitudes does
not suffice for even minimal self-government is grounded in the
apparent possibility that a person could be brainwashed, or otherwise
compelled, to endorse a given motive. Indeed, her brain could be
manipulated in such a way that each of her endorsements is highly
responsive to reasons. This has led some philosophers to supplement
coherentist accounts of autonomy with additional conditions that place
constraints on the causal history of an agent’s endorsements,
constraints of the very sort singled out in the
responsiveness-to-reasoning accounts. These supplements face a
significant challenge, however: it is very difficult to spell out the
distinction between autonomy-
conferring
reasoning and
autonomy-
undermining
reasoning without implicitly appealing to
the very phenomenon one is trying to explain.
Even if historical approaches to autonomy can successfully overcome
this difficulty, they do nothing to address the fact that coherence is
not even necessary for autonomous agency. An agent need not sacrifice
her autonomy in order to decide to act contrary to her long-term
commitments and concerns; acting “out of character” is not
a sufficient condition for failing to govern oneself.  Though a
“weak-willed” agent is hardly a paradigm example of
someone who governs herself when she acts, she too plays a decisive
role in the relative power of her own motives; she authorizes her
behavior, even though she believes that she has good reason to act
otherwise. It is notoriously difficult to make sense of such an
exercise of
 authority.
[
13
]
For our purposes here, however, it
suffices to note that if weakness of will is a genuine phenomenon,
then human agents have the capacity to govern themselves in a way that
they themselves take to be unjustified. They can assert an authority
over themselves that challenges the authority of their very own
reason.
Of course, someone whose action is caused in this way does not
govern herself as
thoroughly
as someone whose will is
“strong”; she acts for a reason that she herself deems
inadequate; and so she is not (adequately) governed by the norms of her
own thought. Nonetheless, even under these conditions, the desires that
move her to act do so on her own authority. To use what is perhaps the
most important metaphor in the literature on personal autonomy, the
weak-willed agent “identifies with” her motives in whatever
way she must in order to be accountable for their effects. It is not
simply that what she does is the result of an earlier autonomous
action. Rather, her accountability is grounded in her contemporaneous
relation to what she is doing.
The possibility of weakness of will points to the more general fact
that an agent’s authorization of her own motives need not take the
form of the judgment that it would not be better to act otherwise.
Various forms of perversity are perfectly compatible with autonomous
agency.  Some philosophers believe that it is also possible for agents
to defy their own contemporaneous normative verdicts without defying
anything very deep about themselves. A woman, for example, may
conclude that even though she has an overriding reason to give up her
child for adoption, she cannot recognize herself in this action, and
so cannot identify with the desire to perform
 it.
[
14
]
Reasonable people will surely disagree about how best to interpret any
particular example. But human experience does seem to support the
general point: the human capacity for self-reflection enables human
agents to distance themselves in thought from every aspect of their
own psyches—even their rational reflections. Given this
possibility, a person’s identification with her motives cannot be
cashed out in terms of higher-order attitudes of approval and
disapproval, or in terms of the rational reflections that typically
ground these attitudes.
Similar concerns are raised by the appeal to plans. Though plans
often enable a person to exercise some measure of control over her life
as a whole, a person can govern herself at a particular time even while
defying her earlier attempts to place constraints on how she will
govern herself at this time. She can take it upon herself to abandon
her plans, or to modify them in ways she did not anticipate when she
first made them. She can even reject the counsel of the long-term
values that provide the underlying rationale for these plans.
Reflections along these lines have led some to conclude that we are
bound to come up empty-handed as long as we think of an agent’s
identification with her motives as a self-relation she is responsible
for securing. For, as long as we take this approach, we appear to be
stuck with the question: under what conditions does the agent govern
her identification with some motive? what conditions must she satisfy
in order to identify with the motives that move her to identify with
some of her motives and not others? under what conditions does she
authorize the attitudes and/or mental activities that issue in a given
lower-order authorization? If we are to escape the regress such
questions evoke, it seems that there must be an attitude that can be
identified with the agent’s point of view simply by virtue of being the
attitude it is; there must be an attitude from which no agent can
possibly be alienated. To be sure, if—like most animals—rational 
agents could not distance themselves from their own motives,
then they would be incapable of governing themselves. Self-government
requires two points of view: that of the governing authority, and that
of the governed. Nonetheless, if there is to be an end to the potential
regress of identifications, it seems that there must also be a limit to
the capacity for self-alienation.
As we have seen, no such limitation seems to apply where the mental
state at stake is an agent’s highest-order desire, evaluative
judgment, or plan, or even an integrated combination of such
attitudes. The only attitude from which it seems that no agent can be
alienated is the desire to have sufficient power to determine one’s
own motives—the desire to be a self-governing
 agent.
[
15
]
Even if, however, we leave to one side the
question of whether this desire can really be attributed to every
potentially self-governing agent, it does not seem to be an adequate
basis for distinguishing motives whose power can be attributed to the
agent herself from motives that are not in this sense internal. For if
a desire underlies
every
action performed by a potentially
self-governing agent, then it plays a causal role even when an agent
fails to govern her motives in the minimal way necessary to be
accountable for them. It thus cannot be the key to any account of what
is special about self-governing 
 agency
[
16
]
.
Perhaps there is no attitude to which we can point in order to
distinguish between cases in which the power of an agent’s motives can
be directly attributed to
her
and cases in which her authority
over her motives is a mere formality. If so, then this might seem to be
a reason to favor accounts that tie autonomous agency to the agent’s
responsiveness to reasons. Unfortunately, however, these accounts have
problems of their own. Most importantly, it seems as though a person
can govern herself even if she does not understand the significance of
what she is doing. To be sure, if someone’s ignorance is perfectly
reasonable, then she may not be to blame if she does something wrong.
But under such circumstances, what frees her from blame is the fact
that she has good reason to be ignorant. There appears to be no basis
for assuming that, in addition to lacking certain relevant information,
she is not really the (ill-informed) power behind her authorization of
her action.
In killing Desdemona, Othello fails to accomplish his aim of doing
what he has good reason to do. But this does not prevent him from
being the author of his own actions. Nor would he necessarily have
been prevented from governing himself if, given his character and
circumstances, he had been
unable
to “track” the
evaluative and nonevaluative facts: he would still have been
accountable for what he did if his reason for doing it had been that
he was too jealous, or too stubborn, or too vain, or too hot-tempered
to be capable of responding to the wide range of reasons against
believing that his wife was unfaithful to him—and the wide
range of reasons against killing her even if she was
 unfaithful.
[
17
]
More carefully, to
insist that he would
not
have been accountable under these
circumstances, we must abandon the assumption that autonomous agency is
possible even if all actions can, in principle, be explained in terms
of deterministic laws of nature. In other words, we must accept the
incompatibilist thesis that if a person’s character is the product of
forces over which he never had any control, and if his character traits
determine his choices, then
even if his motives are responsive to
reasons
, he is not responsible for their motivating force.
The preceding reflections call attention to how difficult it is to
distinguish the conditions of
ideal
self-government from the
conditions under which one is sufficiently self-governing to be
responsible for the motivating power of one’s desires. The difficulty
is manifested in the fact that as soon as we try to pin down the
minimal, threshold conditions of
autonomous
agency, we seem to
come up against the conditions necessary for
agency
itself.
Consider, for example, an alleged paradigm case of an agent who fails
to govern herself: a person who takes drugs even though she would
rather resist the motivating force of her addiction. It is widely
agreed that, even if many people who fit this description are merely
weak-willed, not all of them are: some unwilling addicts are not
self-governing in even the minimal sense. According to coherentist and
responsiveness-to-reasoning accounts, this is because such addicts
are, in effect, “passive bystanders” to their own
motives. But even if we could find a satisfactory account of the
relevant passivity, this diagnosis would be problematic. For it
assimilates the addict to someone whose behavior does not even qualify
as an
action
—someone, e.g., with Tourette’s Syndrome,
whose verbal outbursts and bodily movements are not
even
voluntary
. It thus fails to shed light on the conditions
under which someone acts—intentionally, even 
deliberately—without being accountable for what she does. (The same problem
arises for the proposal that autonomous agents differ from other
agents in virtue of their special way of understanding what they are
up to.  Regardless of whether someone governs her intentional actions,
she knows what she is doing without having to observe her behavior.
If someone had to observe her own behavior in order to discover what
she was up to, then this behavior would not qualify as her action.)
If someone’s motives directly defy her attempt to exercise authority
over her actions, then their power is not only independent of her
authority; they bypass her agency altogether. Even if under these
conditions a person can acknowledge that there is something to be said
for behaving as she does, she is as alienated from the power of her own
motives as she is from the power of the physiological states that
produce her reflex movements. She is not an autonomous agent because
she is not an agent at 
 all
[
18
]
.
Of course, there is a sense in which the addict, but not the victim
of Tourette’s, is responsive to reasons. But even if we could spell out
this distinction in a satisfactory way, we still face the problem of
explaining why an agent’s capacity to respond to external reality is
relevant to her capacity to govern herself. And there are other
problems too. If, for example, nonaction differs from action in virtue
of being unresponsive to reasons, then it follows that nonrational
animals never really act, or that acting from instinct is acting for
reasons. It is not clear what considerations could overcome the
implausibility of these implications.
4. Agents as Causes and the Practical Point of View
Even
nonautonomous
rational agents authorize the motivating
power of the desires that move them to act. Yet there is an important
sense in which the power behind their authorizations is not their own.
What does the relevant impotence amount to? The incompatibilist, we
saw, has a ready answer: an agent is prevented from exercising any
power over her behavior when her authorization of this behavior can be
traced to the determining influence of external powers. According to
the incompatibilist, if the unwilling addict fails to govern herself,
this is because her motives are determined by past states of affair
over which she does not have (and never did have) any control. And if a
willing
addict’s motives have a similar genesis, then she,
too, is not accountable for their motivating power.
The familiar problem with this answer is that there seems to be no way
for an agent to gain an extra measure of control over her motives
simply by acquiring attitudes or judgments or other mental states that
are not determined by anything else. If someone’s attitude toward her
motives is not determined by any earlier state of affairs, then how
can it be determined by
her
? This question pushes some with
incompatibilist intuitions to attribute a special causal power to
agents—a power of agency, which is not reducible to the effect
one event has on another. On this view, a person can
“agent-cause” a certain response to earlier events in a
way that is not itself the effect of these earlier events. (Chisholm,
Clarke, O’Connor, Taylor, R.) She can bring it about that she is
motivated in a certain way, without anything determining her to do so.
Thus, her power over her actions cannot be reduced to the power of
external motivating
 forces.
[
19
]
Such accounts of autonomous agency take seriously the need to
distinguish an agent’s power from the power of the psychic forces that
push and pull her. Yet the obscurities of the special sort of causation
they evoke are enough to prevent most philosophers from embracing this
conception of autonomous agency. To mention just a few familiar
challenges: If agent-causing an event does not involve doing something
to bring it about that the event occurs, then how does the agent exert
her causal power? and why does this power produce its effects at one
time rather than another? If, on the other hand, an agent must do
something in order to agent-cause an action, then doesn’t this require
that she undergo some change? and isn’t this change of state itself an
event?
On the basis of these and other difficulties, many conclude that the
appeal to agent-causation provides no more insight into autonomy than
the simple assertion that we can sometimes govern the causal efficacy
of our own motives. Incompatibilists who are sympathetic with this
complaint nonetheless insist that even if an agent’s causal power must
be understood in terms of the causal relations among events, autonomous
agency is possible only if the conditions that immediately give rise to
an agent’s intention need not suffice to produce it. If, they argue, an
agent cannot authorize a given action without being determined to do so
by powers beyond her control, then autonomous agency is an illusion. If
our every action is an event in a deterministic causal chain, then we
authorize our actions only in the sense that a figurehead authorizes
the decisions she is forced to sign. Indeed, unlike a political puppet,
we do not even have the option of 
 defiance
[
20
]
.
Others see things differently, however. They argue that the
incompatibilist’s conclusion reflects a misunderstanding of the very
nature of rational agency. In making their case, they take their lead
from the philosopher who has contributed more than any other to our
understanding of autonomy. Kant, they note, stresses the deep
differences between the two points of view from which we can think
about ourselves and our
 world.
[
21
]
We take up the
theoretical
point of view in order to gain knowledge about the
nature of reality, and on this basis make predictions about which
effects will follow from which causes. When we want to make up our
minds about what to do, however, we take up the
practical
point of view. From this point of view, too, we survey the facts that
are relevant to our decisions. But since none of these facts, taken
singly or together, is intrinsically action-guiding, they cannot free
us from the task of drawing our own conclusions about what we have
reason to do. (Korsgaard, Bok)
This is true, the neo-Kantians point out, even if our decisions are
the effect of causal powers over which we have no control. Since no
facts of which we could possibly become aware can force us to attribute
any particular significance to them, and since in order to decide what
to do, we must attribute some significance to the facts of which we are
aware (even if this involves taking them to have no significance at
all), our decisions are “up to us.” According to those who press this
line of argument, our authority over our own actions would not be
illusory even if our mode of exercising it were causally determined by
events or states of affairs over which we have no control. Even under
these circumstances, no events or states of affairs would have the
power to determine what we have
reason
to do. So even under
these circumstances, we have to reach
our own
conclusions on this point
and acting accordingly. (Note that since this argument relies on the
connection between determining what we have reason to do and
determining what we
will
do, it can also be endorsed by those
who take acting for reasons to involve responding to theoretical
reasons. Indeed, there is a loose sense in which an agent’s point of
view is “practical” as long as the truth of her predictions
depends on the fact that she makes them.)
5. Conclusion
These last observations take us back to where we started. The
political demand to be permitted to govern ourselves is grounded in the
metaphysics of agency: any agent who faces the task of “making up
her mind” has the authority to determine how she will act. On
most occasions, what an agent does is the direct effect of her exercise
of this authority. Yet there is also ample evidence that the capacity
for self-government is vulnerable to any number of assaults; an agent’s
authority over her actions is no guarantee that she has the power to
determine how she exercises this authority. Agents can be deprived of
their autonomy by brainwashing, depression, anxiety, fatigue; they can
succumb to compulsions and addictions. To what, exactly, are we calling
attention when we say that, under these conditions, an agent does not
govern herself, even if she acts as she does because she thinks she has
sufficient reason to do so, even if she has (thoroughly) considered the
pros and cons of her options, and has endorsed her behavior on this
basis, and even if she would have acted differently if there had been
stronger reason to do so? Most agents who are capable of asking this
question are confident that they are the authors of most of their
actions, and are thus accountable for most of what they do. Nonetheless, as
this brief survey indicates, the self-relation they thereby attribute
to themselves is extremely difficult to pin 
 down.
[
22
]
Bibliography
Albritton, R., 1985, “Freedom of Will and Freedom of
Action,”
Proceedings and Addresses of the American
Philosophical Association
, 59(2): 239–251.
Allison, H., 1990,
Kant’s Theory of Freedom
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Anderson, J., 2003, “Autonomy and the Authority of Personal
Commitments: From Internal Coherence to Social Normativity,”
Philosophical Explorations
, 6(2): 90–108.
–––, 2008, “Disputing Autonomy:
Second-Order Desires and the Dynamics of Ascribing Autonomy,”
Sats: The Nordic Journal of Philosophy
, 9(1): 1–26.
Anderson, J. and Honneth, A., 2005, “Autonomy,
Vulnerability, Recognition, and Justice,” in Christman and
Anderson, 127–49.
Anderson, J. and Lux, W., 2004, “Knowing Your Own Strength:
Accurate Self-Assessment as a Requirement for Personal
Autonomy,”
Philosophy, Psychiatry, & Psychology
,
11(14): 279–94.
Anscombe, G. E., 1985,
Intention
, 2nd ed., Ithaca, New
York: Cornell University Press.
Aristotle, 1999,
Nicomachean Ethics
, I and VII, T. Irwin
(trans.), 2nd ed., Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co.
Arpaly, N., 2004, “Which Autonomy?” in J. Campbell,
M. O’Rourke, and D. Shier (eds.),
Freedom and
Determinism
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 173–88.
–––, 2006,
Merit, Meaning, and Human
Bondage: An Essay on Free Will
, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Arpaly, N. and Schroeder, T., 1999, “Praise, Blame, and the
Whole Self,”
Philosophical Studies
, 93: 161–88.
–––, 2013,
In Praise of Desire
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Audi, R., 1993,
Action, Intention, and Reason
, Ithaca:
Cornell University Press.
Ayer, A.J., 1954, “Freedom and Necessity,” in
Philosophical Essays
, New York: St. Martin’s Press,
3–20.
–––, 1980, “Free-Will and
Rationality,” in Zak van Straaten (ed.),
Philosophical
Subjects: Essays Presented to P.F. Strawson
, Oxford: Clarendon,
1–13.
Benn, S. , 1988,
A Theory of Freedom
, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Bennett, J, 1980, “Accountability,” in
Philosophical Subjects: Essays Presented to P.F. Strawson
,
van Straaten, Z. (ed.), Oxford: Clarendon Press, 14–47.
Benson, J., 1983, “Who is the Autonomous
Man?”
Philosophy
, 58: 5–17.
Benson, P., 1994, “Free Agency and Self-worth,”
Journal of Philosophy
, 91: 650–68.
–––, 2000, “Feeling Crazy: Self-worth and
the Social Character of Responsibility,” in Mackenzie and
Stoljar, 72–93.
–––, 2005, “Taking Ownership: Authority
and Voice in Autonomous Agency,” in Christman and Anderson.
Berlin, I.,1969,
Four Essays on Liberty
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Berofsky, B. (ed.), 1966,
Free Will and Determinism
, New
York: Harper and Row.
–––, 1983, “Autonomy,” in
How
Many Questions? Essays in Honor of Sidney Morgenbesser
,
L. Cauman, I. Levi, C. Parsons, and R. Schwartz (eds.),
Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Co., 301–19.
–––, 1987,
Freedom from Necessity: The
Metaphysical Basis of Responsibility
, New York: Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
–––, 1992, “On the Absolute Freedom of the
Will,”
American Philosophical Quarterly
, 29:
279–89.
–––, 1995,
Liberation from Self: A Theory of
Personal Autonomy
, New York: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
–––, 2003, “Identification, the Self, and
Autonomy,”
Social Philosophy and Policy
, 20(2):
199–220.
–––, 2005, “Autonomy Without Free
Will,” in Taylor 2005, 58–86.
Bishop, J., 1989,
Natural Agency: An Essay on the Causal
Theory of Action
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bittner, R, “Autonomy, and Then,”
Philosophical
Explanations
, 5(3): 217–28.
Bok, H., 1998,
Freedom and Responsibility
, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Bonjour, L. 1976, “Determinism, Libertarianism, and
Agent-causation,”
Southern Journal of Philosophy
, 14:
145–56.
Brand, M. and Walton, D. (eds.), 1976,
Action Theory
,
Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Bratman, M., 1979, “Practical Reasoning and Weakness of the
Will,”
Noûs
, 13: 131–51.
–––, 1987,
Intention, Plans, and Practical
Reason
, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
–––, 1996, “Identification, Decision, and
Treating as a Reason,”
Philosophical Topics
, 24:
1–18.
–––, 1999,
Faces of Intention: Selected
Essays on Intention and Agency
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
–––, 2002, “Hierarchy, Circularity, and
Double Reduction,” in Buss and Overton, 65–85.
–––, 2003a, “A Desire of One’s Own,”
Journal of Philosophy
, 100(5): 221–42.
–––, 2003b, “Autonomy and Hierarchy,”
Social Philosophy and Policy
, 20(2): 156–76.
–––, 2004, “Three Theories of
Self-Governance,”
Philosophical Topics
, 32:
21–46.
–––, 2005, “Planning Agency, Autonomous
Agency,” in J. Taylor 2005, 33–57.
–––, 2007,
Structures of Agency:
Essays
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2013, “The Fecundity of Planning
Agency,” in
Oxford Studies in Agency and
Responsibility
, 1(1): 47–69.
Buss, S., 1994, “Autonomy Reconsidered,”
Midwest
Studies in Philosophy
, 9: 95–121.
–––, 1997, “Weakness of Will,”
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
, 78(1): 13–44.
–––, 2012, “Autonomous Agency:
Self-determination in the Passive Mode,”
Ethics
, 122
(4): 647–91.
–––, 2013, “The Possibility of Action as
the Impossibility of Certain forms of Self–alienation,” in
Oxford Studies in Agency and Responsibility
, 1(1):
12–48.
Buss, S. and H. Overton (eds.), 2002,
Contours of Agency:
Essays on Themes from Harry Frankfurt
, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press.
Chisholm, R., 1966, “Freedom and Action,” in Lehrer
1966, 11–44.
–––, 1971, “Reflections on Human
Agency,”
Idealistic Studies
, 1: 36–46.
–––, 1976a,
Person and Object
, La
Salle, Ill.: Open Court Press.
–––, 1976b, “The Agent as Cause,” in
Action Theory
, M. Brand and D. Walton (eds.), Dordrecht: D.
Reidel Publishing Co.
–––, 1982a, “Replies,” in
Roderick M. Chisholm
, R.J. Bogdan (ed.), Dordrecht: D. Reidel
Publishing Co., 1–16.
–––, 1982b, “Human Freedom and the
Self,” in Watson, 24–45.
–––, 1995, “Agents, Causes, and Events:
The Problem of Free Will,” in O’Connor 1995a, 95–100.
Christman, J., 1988, “Constructing the Inner Citadel: Recent
Work on the Concept of Autonomy,”
Ethics
, 99:
109–124.
––– (ed.), 1989,
The Inner Citadel: Essays
on Individual Autonomy
, New York: Oxford University Press.
–––, 1991, “Autonomy and Personal
History,”
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
, 21:
1–24.
–––, 1993, “Defending Historical Autonomy:
A Reply to Professor Mele,”
Canadian Journal of
Philosophy
, 23: 281–90.
–––, 2004, “Relational Autonomy, Liberal
Individualism, and the Social Constitution of Selves,”
Philosophical Studies
, 117: 143–64.
Christman, J. and Anderson, J. (eds), 2005,
Autonomy and the
Challenges to Liberalism: New Essays
, J. Christman and
J. Anderson, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Clarke, R., 1993, “Toward a Credible Agent-Causal Account of
Free Will,”
Noûs
, 27: 191–203, reprinted in
O’Connor 1995a, 201–15.
–––, 1996, “Agent-Causation and
Event-Causation in the Production of Free Action,”
Philosophical Topics
, 24: 19–48.
–––, 2003,
Libertarian Accounts of Free
Will
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2008, “Incompatibilist
(Nondeterministic) Theories of Free Will,” in
The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Fall 2008 Edition), Edward N. Zalta
(ed.), URL = 
 <
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/incompatibilism-theories/
>.
–––, 2014,
Omissions
, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Clarke, R., McKenna, M., and Smith, A. (eds.), 2015,
The
Nature of Moral Responsibility
, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Clarke, R. and Reed, T., 2015, “Free Will and Agential
Powers,” in
Oxford Studies in Agency and
Responsibility
, 3(1): 6–33.
Copp, D., 2005, “The Normativity of Self-Grounded
Reason,”
Social Philosophy and Policy
, 22 (2):
165–203.
Cuypers, S., 2006, “The Trouble with Externalist
Compatibilist Autonomy,” in
Philosophical Studies
, 129
(2): 171–196.
Darwall, S., 2006, “The Value of Autonomy and Autonomy of
the Will,”
Ethics: An International Journal of Social,
Political, and Legal Philosophy
, 116(2): 263–84.
Davidson, D., 1980,
Essays on Actions and Events
, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
–––, 1963, “Actions, Reason, and
Causes,”
Journal of Philosophy
, 60: 685–700.
Deligiorgi, K., 2012,
The Scope of Autonomy: Kant and the
Morality of Freedom
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dennett, D., 1978, “On Giving Libertarians What They Say
They Want,” in
Brainstorms
, Cambridge, Mass.: Branford
Books, reprinted in O’Connor 1995a, 43–56.
–––, 1984,
Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free
Will Worth Wanting
, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Doris, J., Knobe, J., & Woolfolk, R., 2007, “Variantism
about Responsibility,”
Philosophical Perspectives, 21,
Philosophy of Mind
: 183–214.
Doris, J., 2015,
Talking to Our Selves: Reflection, Ignorance,
and Agency
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Double, R., 1991,
The Non-Reality of Free Will
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Dworkin, G., 1970, “Acting Freely,”
Noûs
, 4: 367–83.
–––, 1976, “Autonomy and Behavior
Control,”
Hastings Center Report
, 6: 23–28.
–––, 1988,
The Theory and Practice of
Autonomy
, New York: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 1989, “The Concept of
Autonomy,” in Christman 1989, 54–62.
Dworkin, R., 1994,
Life’s Dominion
, New York: Random
House, Inc.
Ekstrom, L., 1993, “A Coherence Theory of Autonomy,”
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
, 53:
599–616.
Feinberg, J., 1970a, “Causing Voluntary Actions,” in
J. Feinberg,
Doing and Deserving
, Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 152–86.
–––, 1970b, “What Is So Special about
Mental Illness?” in J. Feinberg,
Doing and Deserving
,
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 272–92.
–––, 1989, “Autonomy,” in Christman
1989, 27–53.
Fischer, J., 1982, “Responsibility and Control,”
Journal of Philosophy
, 79: 24–40, reprinted in Fischer
1986, 174–90.
––– (ed.), 1986,
Moral Responsibility
,
Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
–––, 1987, “Responsiveness and Moral
Responsibility,” in Schoeman, 88–106.
–––, 1994,
The Metaphysics of Free Will: An
Essay on Control
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 1999, “Recent Work on Moral
Responsibility,”
Ethics
, 110: 93–139
–––, 2002, “Frankfurt-Style
Compatibilism,” in Buss and Overton 2002, 1–26.
–––, 2006,
My Way: Essays on Moral
Responsibility
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2012, “Responsibility and Autonomy:
The Problem of Mission Creep,”
Philosophical Issues
,
22(1): 165–84.
–––, 2015, “Responsibility and the Actual
Sequence,”
Oxford Studies in Agency and Moral
Responsibility
, 3(1): 120–135.
–––, 2017, “Responsibility, Autonomy, and
the Zygote Argument,”
Journal of Ethics
, 21: 223–237.
Fischer, J. and Ravizza,M., 1993,
Perspectives on Moral
Responsibility
, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
–––, 1998,
Responsibility and Control: A
Theory of Moral Responsibility
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Fischer, J., Kane, R., Pereboom, D., and Vargas, M., 2007,
Four Views on Free Will
, Malden, MA: Blackwell
Publishers.
Foot, Philippa, 1957, “Free Will as Involving
Determinism,”
The Philosophical Review
, 66:
439–50, reprinted in Berofsky 1966, 95–108.
Frankfurt, H., 1988a,
The Importance of What We Care
About
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 1988b, “Alternate Possibilities and
Moral Responsibility,” in Frankfurt 1988a, 1–10.
–––, 1988c, “Freedom of the Will and the
Concept of a Person,” in Frankfurt 1988a, 11–25
–––, 1988d, “Three Concepts of Free
Action: II,” in Frankfurt 1988a, 47–57.
–––, 1988e, “Identification and
Externality,” in Frankfurt 1988a, 58–67.
–––, 1988f, “The Importance of What We
Care About,” in Frankfurt 1988a, 80–94.
–––, 1988g, “Identification and
Wholeheartedness,” in Frankfurt 1988a, 159–76.
–––, 1988h, “Rationality and the
Unthinkable,” in Frankfurt 1988a, 177–90.
–––, 1999a,
Necessity, Volition and
Love
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 1999b, “The Faintest Passion,”
in Frankfurt 1999a, 95–107.
–––, 1999c, “Autonomy, Necessity, and
Love,” in Frankfurt 1999a, 129–41.
–––, 1999d, “On Caring,” in
Frankfurt 1999a, 155–80.
–––, 2002a, “Reply to John Martin
Fischer,” in Buss and Overton, 27–32.
–––, 2002b, “Reply to Michael
Bratman,” in Buss and Overton, 86–90.
–––, 2002c, “Reply to J. David
Velleman,” in Buss and Overton, 124–28.
–––, 2002d, “Reply to Gary Watson,”
in Buss and Overton, 160–64.
–––, 2002e, “Reply to T.M. Scanlon,”
in Buss and Overton, 184–88.
–––, 2002f, “Reply to Richard
Moran,” in Buss and Overton, 218–25.
–––, 2002g, “Reply to Jonathan
Lear,” in Buss and Overton, 293–97.
Friedman, M., 1986, “Autonomy and the Split-Level

Self,”
Southern Journal of Philosophy
, 24:
19–35.
–––, 1989, “Autonomy in Social
Context,” in C. Peden and J. Sterva (eds.),
Freedom,
Equality, and Social Change
, Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen,
158–69.
–––, 2003,
Autonomy, Gender, and
Politics
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Gert, B. and Duggan,T., 1979, “Free Will as the Ability to
Will,”
Noûs
, 13: 197–217, reprinted in
Fischer 1986, 205–24.
Ginet, C., 1996, “Might We Have No Choice?” in Lehrer
1966, 87–104.
–––, 1962, “Can the Will be
Caused?,”
The Philosophical Review
, 71:
49–55.
–––, 1990,
On Action
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Greenspan, P., 1978, “Behavior Control and Freedom of
Action,”
Philosophical Review
, 87: 225–40,
reprinted in Fischer,
Moral Responsibility
,
191–204.
–––, 1999, “Impulse and Self-reflection:
Frankfurtian Responsibility versus Free Will,” in
Philosophical Topics
, 3(4): 325–40.
Hampshire, S., 1965,
Freedom of the Individual
, New York:
Harper and Row.
–––, 1983,
Thought and Action
, Notre
Dame, Ind.: University of Notre Dame Press.
Harris, J., 2008,
Of Liberty and Necessity. The Free Will
Debate in Eighteenth–Century British Philosophy
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Hill, T., 2013, “Kantian Autonomy and Contemporary Ideas of
Autonomy,” in O. Sensen (ed.),
Kant on Moral Autonomy
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 13–21.
–––, 1989, “The Kantian Conception of
Autonomy,” in Christman, 91–108.
Hobart, R., 1934, “Free Will as Involving Determinism and
Inconceivable Without It,”
Mind
, 43: 1–27,
reprinted in Berofsky 1966, 63–94.
Holton, R., 1999, “Intention and Weakness of Will,”
Journal of Philosophy
, 96: 241–62
Honderich, T. (ed.), 1973,
Essays on Freedom of Action
,
London: Rutledge & Kegan Paul.
–––, 1988,
The Consequences of
Determinism
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Horgan, T., 2011, “The Phenomenology of Agency and Freedom:
Lessons from Introspection and Lessons from Its Limits,”
Humana Mente
, 15: 77–97.
–––, 2015, “Injecting the Phenomenology of
Agency into the Free Will Debate,”
Oxford Studies in Agency
and Responsibility
, 3: 34–61.
Hornsby, J., 2004, “Agency and Actions,” in
H. Steward and J. Hyman, eds., 2004,
Agency and Action
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1–23.
–––, 2004, “Agency and Alienation,”
in de M. Caro and D. MacArthur (eds.),
Naturalism in
Question
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
173–87.
Hume, D., 1739/2000,
A Treatise of Human Nature
, Norton,
D. and Norton, M. (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 1748/1999,
An Enquiry Concerning Human
Understanding
, T. Beauchamp (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
–––, 1751/1975,
An Enquiry Concerning the
Principles of Morals
, L. Selby-Bigge (ed.), 3rd. ed. (revised by
R. Nidditch), Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hyun, I., 2001, “Authentic Values and Individual
Autonomy,”
Journal of Value Inquiry
, 35(2):
195–208.
Ismael, J., 2016,
How Physics Makes Us Free
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Jaworska, A., 2007a, “Caring and Full Moral Standing,”
Ethics
117(3): 460–97.
–––, 2007b, “Caring and Internality,”
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
, 74(3):
529–568.
–––, 2009, “Caring, Minimal Autonomy, and
the Limits of Liberalism,” in H. Lindemann M. Verkerk, and
M. Walker (eds.),
Naturalized Bioethics: Toward Responsible
Knowing and Practice
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
80–105.
–––, 1999, “Respecting the Margins of
Agency: Alzheimer’s Patients and the Capacity to Value,”
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 28(2): 105–38.
Kane, R., 1985,
Free Will and Values
, Albany: State
University of New York Press.
–––, 1996,
The Significance of Free
Will
, New York: Oxford University Press.
––– (ed.) 2002,
The Oxford Handbook of Free
Will
, New York: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2007, “Libertarianism” and
“Response to Fischer, Pereboom, and Vargas,” in
J. Fischer, R. Kane, D. Pereboom, M. Vargas,
Four Views on Free
Will
, Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Kant, I., 1785,
The Groundwork of the Metaphysics of
Morals
, in
Practical Philosophy
, M. Gregor (ed. and
trans.), in
The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel
Kant
, P. Guyer  and A. Wood (eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996, 37–108.
–––, 1788,
Critique of Practical
Reason
, in
Practical Philosophy
, Gregor, M. (ed. and
trans.), in
The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel
Kant
, P. Guyer and A. Wood (eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1996, 133–272.
–––, 1793,
Religion Within the Boundaries of
Mere Reason
, in
Religion and Rational Theology
,
G. Giovanni and A. Wood, A. (ed. and trans.), in
The Cambridge
Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant
, P. Guyer and A. Wood
(eds.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996, 39–216.
Kenny, A., 1976,
Freedom, Will, and Power
, Oxford:
Blackwell.
Killmister, S., 2017,
Taking the Measure of Autonomy: A
Four–Dimensional Theory of Self–governance
, Abingdon:
Routledge.
Knobe, J., 2003, “Intentional Action and Side Effects in
Ordinary Language,”
Analysis
, 63: 190–93.
Knobe, J and Doris, J. , 2010, “Strawsonian Variations: Folk
Morality and the Search for a Unified Theory,” in
The Moral
Psychology Handbook
, J. Doris (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Korsgaard, C., 1996a, “Morality as Freedom,” in
Creating the Kingdom of Ends
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
–––, 1996b,
The Sources of Normativity
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 2008,
The Constitution of Agency:
Essays on Practical Reason and Moral Psychology
, New York: Oxford
University Press.
–––, 2009,
Self-Constitution: Agency,
Identity, and Integrity
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
LeBar, M., 2005, “Eudaimonist Autonomy,”
American
Philosophical Quarterly
, 42(3): 171–83.
Lehrer, K. (ed.), 1966,
Freedom and Determinism
, New
York: Random House.
–––, 1997,
Self-Trust
, Oxford; Oxford
University Press.
–––, 2003, “Reason and Autonomy,”
Social Philosophy and Policy
, 20(2): 177–98.
Leiter, B., 2007, “Nietzsche’s Theory of the Will,”
Philosopher’s Imprint
, 7: 1–15.
Levy, N., 1981, “Autonomy and Addiction,”
Canadian
Journal of Philosophy
, 36(3): 427–48.
Lewis, D., 1981, “Are We Free to Break the Laws?”
Theoria
, 47: 113–21.
–––, 1973, “Causation,”
Journal
of Philosophy
, 70: 556–67.
–––, 1979, “Counterfactual Dependence and
Time’s Arrow,”
Noûs
, 13: 455–76.
Libet, B., Gleason, C. A., Wright, E. W., and Pearl, D. K., 1983,
“Time of conscious intention to act in relation to onset of
cerebral activity (readiness-potential): The unconscious initiation of
a freely voluntary act,”
Brain
, 106: 623–642.
Libet, B.,Wright, E., Gleason, C., 1983, “Readiness potentials
preceding unrestricted spontaneous pre-planned voluntary acts,”
Electroencephalographic and Clinical Neurophysiology
, 54:
322–325.
Libet, B., 1985, “Unconscious cerebral initiative and the
role of conscious will in voluntary action,”
Behavioral and
Brain Sciences
, 8: 529–566.
Lippert-Rasmussen, K , 2003, “Identification and
Responsibility,”
Ethical Theory and Moral Practice
6(4): 349–76.
Locke, D., 1975, “Three Concepts of Free Action: I,”
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
, suppl. vol. 49:
95–112.
MacKay, D.M., 1960, “On the Logical Indeterminacy of a Free
Choice,”
Mind
, 69: 31–46.
–––, 1971, “Choice in a Mechanistic
Universe: A Reply to Some Critics,”
British Journal for the
Philosophy of Science
, 22: 275–85.
–––, 1973, “The Logical Indeterminateness
of Human Choice,”
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 24: 405–408.
Mackenzie, C. and Stoljar, N. (eds.), 2000,
Relational
Autonomy: Feminist Perspectives on Autonomy, Agency, and the Social
Self
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Malcolm, N., 1968, “The Conceivability of Mechanism,”
The Philosophical Review
, 77: 45–72, reprinted in
Watson 1982, 127–49.
McGreer, V. and Petit, P., 2015, “The Hard Problem of
Responsibility,”
Oxford Studies in Agency and
Responsibility
, 3(1): 160–88.
McKenna, M., 2005, “Reasons Reactivity & Incompatibilist
Intuitions,”
Philosophical Explorations
, 8(2):
131–43.
–––, 2008, “A Hard-line Reply to
Pereboom’s Four-case Argument,”
Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research
, 77(1): 142–59.
–––, 2013, “Reasons-Responsiveness,
Agents, and Mechanisms,” in
Oxford Studies in Agency and
Responsibility
, 1: 151–183.
–––, 2014, “Resisting the Manipulation
Argument: A Hard-liner Takes it on the Chin,”
Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research
, 89: 467–84.
Mele, A., 1993, “History and Personal Autonomy,”
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
, 23: 271–80
–––, 1995,
Autonomous Agents: From
Self-Control to Autonomy
, New York: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2002, “Autonomy, Self-Control, and
Weakness of Will,” in Kane, 529–548.
–––, 2004, “The Illusion of Conscious Will
and the Causation of Intentional Actions,”
Philosophical
Topics
, 32 (1/2): 193–213.
–––, 2009,
Effective Intentions: The Power
of Conscious Will
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Meyers, D., 1987, “Personal Autonomy and the Paradox of
Feminine Socialization,”
Journal of Philosophy
, 84:
619–28.
–––, 1989,
Self, Society, and Personal
Choice
, New York: Columbia University Press.
Moran, R., 2001,
Authority and Estrangement: An Essay on
Self-knowledge
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
–––, 2002, “Frankfurt on Identification:
Ambiguities of Activity in Mental Life,” in Buss and Overton,
189–217.
Morgenbesser, S. and Walsh, J.(eds.), 1962,
Free Will
,
Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
Nagel, T., 1986, “The Problem of Autonomy,”in
The
View from Nowhere
, New York: Oxford University Press,
110–20, reprinted in O’Connor 1995a, 33–42.
Nahmias, E., Mooris, S., Nadelhoffer, T. and Turner, J., 2005,
“Surveying Freedom: Four Intuitions about Free Will and Moral
Responsibility,”
Philosophical Psychology
, 18:
561–84.
Neely, W., 1974, “Freedom and Desire,”
Philosophical Review
, 83: 32–54.
Nelkin, D., 2007, “Do We Have a Coherent Set of Intuitions
about Moral Responsibility?”
Midwest Studies in
Philosophy
31: 243–59.
–––, 2011,
Making Sense of Freedom and
Responsibility
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nichols, S. and Knobe, J. , 2007, “Moral Responsibility and
Determinism: The Cognitive Science of Folk Intuitions,”
Noûs
, 41(4): 663–85.
Nozick, R., 1981,
Philosophical Explanations
, Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press.
O’Connor, T., 1993, “Indeterminism and Free Agency: Three
Recent Views,”
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
,
53: 499–525.
––– (ed.), 1995a,
Agents, Causes and Events:
Essays on Indeterminism and Free Will
, New York: Oxford
University Press.
–––, 1995b, “Agent Causation,” in
O’Connor (ed.),
Agents, Causes, and Events
, New York:
Oxford University Press, 173–200.
–––, 1996, “Why Agent Causation?”
Philosophical Topics
, 24: 143–51.
–––, 2000,
Persons and Causes: The
Metaphysics of Free Will
, New York: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2000,
Persons and Causes
, New
York: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2009, “Agent-Causal Power,” in
Dispositions and Causes
, Toby Handfield (ed.), Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 184–214.
–––, 2010, “Free Will,”
The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Winter 2010 Edition), Edward
N. Zalta (ed.), URL = 
<
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2010/entries/freewill/
>.
Oshana, M. (ed.), 2015,
Personal Autonomy and Social
Oppression
, Abingdon: Routledge.
Pereboom, D., 1995, “Determinism el Dente,”
Nous
, 29:
21–45.
–––, 2001,
Living Without Free Will
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 2004, “Is Our Concept of Agent
Causation Incoherent?,”
Philosophical Topics
, 32:
275–86.
–––, 2006a, “Kant on Transcendental
Freedom,”
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
, 73:
537–67.
–––, 2006b, “Reasons Responsiveness,
Alternative Possibilities, and Manipulation Arguments Against
Compatibilism: Reflections on John Martin Fischer’s
My
Way
,”
Philosophical Books
, 47: 198–212.
–––, 2008, “A Hard-line Reply to the
Multiple-Case Manipulation Argument,”
Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research
, 77(1): 160–70.
–––, 2009, “Hard Incompatibilism and Its
Rivals,”
Philosophical Studies
, 144: 21–33.
–––, 2014,
Free Will, Agency, and Meaning in
Life
, New York: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2015, “The Phenomenology of Agency
and Deterministic Agent Causation,” in
Horizons of
Authenticity in Phenomenology, Existentialism, and Moral Psychology:
Essays in Honor of Charles Guignon
, Megan Altman and Hans Gruenig
(eds.), New York: Springer, 2015, 277–94.
Pink, T., 2016,
Self–determination
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Plato, 1997,
Protagoras
, Lombardo,S. and Bell,
K. (trans.), in
Plato: Completed Works
, J. Cooper (ed.) and
D. Hutchinson (asst. ed.), Indianapolis: Hacket Publishing Company,
746–790.
Radoilska, L. (ed.), 2012,
Autonomy and Mental Disorder
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Reath, A., 2006,
Agency and Autonomy in Kant’s Moral Theory:
Selected Essays
, Oxford and New York: Oxford University
Press.
Reid, T., 1788/1969,
Essays on the Active Powers of Man
,
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Richardson, H., 2001, “Autonomy’s Many Normative
Presuppositions,”
American Philosophical Quarterly
, 38:
287–303.
Roughly, N., 2002, “The Uses of Hierarchy: Autonomy and
Valuing,”
Philosophical Explanations
, 5(3):
167–85.
Rowe, W., 1987, “Two Concepts of Freedom,”
The
Proceedings and Addresses of the American Philosophical
Association
, 61: 43–64; reprinted in O’Connor 1995a,
151–72.
–––, 1991, “Responsibility,
Agent-Causation, and Freedom: An Eighteenth-Century View,”
Ethics
101(2): 237–57, reprinted in Fischer and Ravizza
(eds.),
Perspectives on Moral
Responsibility
, 263–85.
Santiago, J., 2005, “Personal Autonomy: What’s Content Got
to Do with It?”
Social Theory and Practice: An International
and Interdisciplinary Journal of Social Philosophy
, 31(1):
77–104.
Sartorio, C., 2015, “Sensitivity to Reasons and Actual
Sequences,” in David Shoemaker (ed.), 2015,
Oxford Studies
in Agency and Responsibility
, 3(1): 104–19.
–––, 2016,
Causation and Free Will
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sartre, J.-P., 1956,
Being and Nothingness
, H. Barnes
(trans.), New York: Simon & Schuster.
Scanlon, T., 2002, “Reasons and Passions,” in Buss and
Overton.
Schatz, D., 1985, “Free Will and the Structure of
Motivation,” in
Midwest Studies in Philosophy
, 10:
451–82.
Schoeman, F. (ed.), 1987,
Responsibility, Character and the
Emotions: New Essays in Moral Philosophy
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Schroeder, T., 2015, “Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder and
Moral Agency,”
Oxford Studies in Agency and
Responsibility
, 3(1): 85–103.
Schroeter, F., 2004, “Endorsement and Autonomous
Agency,”
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
,
69(3): 633–59.
Searle, J., 2003,
Rationality in Action
, Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press.
Sehon, S., 2016,
Free Will and Action Explanation
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sher, G., 2006, “Out of Control,”
Ethics
116(2): 285–301.
Shoemaker, D., 2003, “Caring, Identification, and
Agency,”
Ethics
, 114(1): 88–118.
–––, 2012, “Attributability,
Answerability, and Accountability: Toward a Wider Theory of Moral
Responsibility,”
Ethics
, 121(3): 602–32.
–––, 2013 (ed.),
Oxford Studies in Agency
and Responsibility
(Volume 1), Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
–––, 2015 (ed.),
Oxford Studies in Agency
and Responsibility
(Volume 3), Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Slote, M., 1980, “Understanding Free Will,”
Journal of Philosophy
, 77: 136–51, reprinted in Fischer
(ed.) 1986, 124–39.
–––, 1982, “Selective Necessity and the
Free-Will Problem,”
Journal of Philosophy
, 79:
5–24.
Smith, A., 2008, “Control, Responsibility, and Moral
Assessment,”
Philosophical Studies
138: 367–92.
–––, 2005, “Responsibility for Attitudes:
Activity and Passivity in Mental Life,”
Ethics
115(2):
236–71.
–––, 2012, “Attributability,
Answerability, and Accountability: In Defense of a Unified
Account,”
Ethics
, 122: 575–589.
Spinoza, B. de, 1985,
Ethics
, E. Curley, (trans.),
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Sripada, C., 2015 “Moral Responsibility, Reasons, and the
Self,”
Oxford Studies in Agency and Responsibility
,
3(1): 242–64.
Steward, H., 2012,
A Metaphysics of Freedom
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Strawson, G., 1986,
Freedom and Belief
, Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
–––, 1994, “The Impossibility of Moral
Responsibility,”
Philosophical Studies
, 75:
5–24.
Strawson, P.F., 1962, “Freedom and Resentment,”
Proceedings of the British Academy
, 48: 187–211.
–––, 1992, “Freedom and Necessity,”
Chapter 10,
Analysis and Metaphysics: An Introduction to
Metaphysics
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Stroud, S. and Tappolet, C. (eds.), 2003,
Weakness of Will and
Practical Irrationality
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Stump, E., 1993,“Sanctification, Hardening of the Heart, and
Frankfurt’s Concept of Free Will,” in Fischer and Ravizza,
211–236.
Taylor, C., 1982, “Responsibility for Self,” in Watson
1982, 111–26.
–––, 1989,
Sources of Self: The Making of
Modern Identity
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Taylor, J. (ed.), 2005,
Personal Autonomy: New Essays on
Personal Autonomy and Its Role in Contemporary Moral Philosophy
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 1979, “What’s Wrong with Negative
Liberty,” in
The Idea of Freedom: Essays in Honour of Isaiah
Berlin
, Alan Ryan (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press,
175–93.
Taylor, R., 1966,
Action and Purpose
, Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice-Hall.
–––, 1982, “Agent and Patient,”
Erkenntnis
, 18: 111–26.
Thalberg, I., 1978, “Hierarchical Analyses of Unfree
Action,”
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
, 8:
211–26.
Usher, M., 2006, “Control, Choice, and the
Convergence/Divergence Dynamics: A Compatibilistic Probabilistic
Theory of Free Will,”
Journal of Philosophy
, 103(4),
188–213.
Van Inwagen, P., 1982, “The Incompatibility of Free Will and
Determinism,” in Watson 1982, 46–58.
–––, 1983,
An Essay on Free Will
,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
–––, 2017,
Thinking about Free Will
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Velleman, J. D., 1989a, “Epistemic Freedom,”
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
, 70: 73–97, reprinted
in Velleman 2000, 32–55..
–––, 1989b,
Practical Reflection
,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
–––, 1992,“What Happens When Someone
Acts?,”
Mind
, 101: 461–81, reprinted in Velleman
2000, 123–43.
–––, 2000,
The Possibility of Practical
Reason
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
–––, 2002,“Identification and
Identity,” in Buss and Overton, 91–123.
–––, 2005,
Self to Self: Selected
Essays
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Veltman, A. and Piper, M., 2014 (eds.),
Autonomy, Oppression,
and Gender
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wallace, R.J., 1994,
Responsibility and the Moral
Sentiments
, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Watson, G., 1975, “Free Agency,”
Journal of
Philosophy
, 72: 205–20, reprinted in Watson 1982,
96–110, and in Watson 2004, 13–32.
–––, 1977, “Skepticism about Weakness of
Will,”
Philosophical Review
, 85: 316–39.
––– (ed.), 1982,
Free Will
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
–––, 1987, “Free Action and Free
Will,”
Mind
, 96: 147–72; reprinted in Watson
2004, 161–96.
–––, 1993, “Responsibility and the Limits
of Evil: Variations on a Strawsonian Theme,” in Fischer and
Ravizza 1993, 119–50, reprinted in Watson 2004,
219–59.
–––, 1996, “Two Faces of
Responsibility,”
Philosophical Topics
, 24 (2):
227–48, reprinted in Watson 2004, 260–87.
–––, 1999a, “Soft Libertarianism and Hard
Compatibilism,”
Journal of Ethics
, 3 (4): 351–65,
reprinted in Watson 2004, 197–215
–––, 1999b, “Disordered Appetites,”
in
Addiction: Entries and Exits
, J. Elster (ed.), New York:
Russell Sage Publications, 3–28, reprinted in Watson 2004,
59–87.
–––, 2002, “Volitional Necessities,”
in Buss and Overton 2002, 129–59, reprinted in Watson 2004,
88–122.
–––, 2003, (ed.),
Free Will, 2nd Edn.
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2004,
Agency and Answerability:
Selected Essays
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Wegner, D., 2002,
The Illusion of Conscious Will
,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Westlund, A., 2003, “Selflessness and Responsibility for
Self: Is Deference Compatible with Autonomy?”
Philosophical
Review
, 112(4): 483–523.
Wiggins, D., “Towards a Reasonable Libertarianism,” in
Honderich 1973, 31–62.
Williams, B., 1993,
Shame and Necessity
, Berkeley,
California: University of California Press.
Wilson, G., 1989,
The Intentionality of Human Action
,
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Wolf, S., 1980, “Asymmetrical Freedom,”
Journal of
Philosophy
, 77: 151–66, reprinted in Fischer 1986,
225–40.
–––, “The Importance of Free Will,”
Mind
, 90: 386–405, reprinted in Fischer and Ravizza
1993, 101–18.
–––, 1987, “Sanity and the Metaphysics of
Responsibility,” in Schoeman, 46–62.
–––, 1990,
Freedom within Reason
, New
York: Oxford University Press.
Yaffe, G., 2000,
Liberty Worth the Name: Locke on Free
Agency
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
–––, 2004,
Manifest Activity: Thomas Reid’s
Theory of Action
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Yeomans, C., 2015,
The Expansion of Autonomy: Hegel’s
Pluralistic Philosophy of Action
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Young, Robert, 1986,
Personal Autonomy: Beyond Negative and
Positive Liberty
, London: Croom Helm Ltd.
Zimmerman, D., 2003, “That Was Then, This Is Now: Personal History
vs. Psychological Structure in Compatibilist Theories of Autonomous
Agency,”
Noûs
, 37(4): 638–71.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
[Please contact the author with suggestions.]
Related Entries
action
|
agency
|
Aristotle
|
authority
|
autonomy: in moral and political philosophy
|
causation: the metaphysics of
|
compatibilism
|
determinism: causal
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on autonomy
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on the self
|
free will
|
Hume, David: on free will
|
incompatibilism: (nondeterministic) theories of free will
|
incompatibilism: arguments for
|
intention
|
Kant, Immanuel
|
Kant, Immanuel: moral philosophy
|
mental causation
|
moral motivation
|
moral responsibility
|
Plato: ethics and politics in
The Republic
|
practical reason
|
practical reason: and the structure of actions
|
Reid, Thomas
|
Sartre, Jean-Paul
|
Schopenhauer, Arthur
|
sovereignty
|
weakness of will
Acknowledgments
I am grateful to Sven Nyholm for prodding me to see
ways in which I could improve the entry when I was revising it for the first time.  During that revision, he also worked tirelessly to help me track down references and input all of the new material.