Philosophy of Immunology
First published Thu Dec 22, 2016; substantive revision Thu May 7, 2020
Philosophy of immunology is a subfield of philosophy of biology
dealing with ontological and epistemological issues related to the
studies of the immune system. While speculative investigations and
abstract analyses have always been part of immune theorizing, until
recently philosophers have largely ignored immunology. Yet the
implications for understanding the philosophical basis of organismal
functions framed by immunity offer new perspectives on fundamental
questions of biology and medicine. Developed in the context of history
of medicine, theoretical biology, and medical anthropology, philosophy
of immunology differs from these related branches of study in its
focus on traditional philosophical questions concerning identity,
individuality, ecology, cognition, scientific methodology and theory
construction. This broad agenda derives from immunology’s
multifaceted research program that has developed from its initial
clinical challenges of host defense, transplantation, autoimmunity,
tumor immunology, and allergy. In addition to these well-established
research areas, immunity is now understood to play a central role in
other physiological functions, development, ecology, and evolutionary
mechanics. Holding together these diverse domains of inquiry lie
philosophical commitments oriented by organismal identity. In this
regard, pertinent issues are raised concerning
cognition (organization of immune perception and information
processing),
the character of individuality (framed by the ecological context
of immune-mediated assimilation and rejection), and
the dynamics of complex systems (understood as holistic systems
biology).
Indeed, immunology, in the context of cognitive science, evolutionary
biology, environmental sciences, and development provides multi-focal
perspectives for philosophy of science.
1. Introduction
2. Organism-Level Functions of the Immune System
2.1 Diachronic identity
2.2 Synchronic identity
2.3 The immune self
3. Immune Ecology and Evolution
3.1 Ecological approaches to immunity
3.2 Immunity and evolution
4. The Character of Immunological Knowledge
4.1. Cognitivist models
4.1.1 Representational models
4.1.2 Non-representational models
4.1.3 Presentational cognition
4.2 Reductionism versus holism in immunology
5. Immunology’s Social Dimensions
6. Conclusion
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Introduction
The immune system is typically represented as a system of defense that
protects the organism from pathogens. However, this system is known to
play other functions in the organism that include
regeneration and repair of damaged tissues, scar formation, and
wound healing (Forbes and Rosenthal 2014);
surveillance against malignancies (Swann and Smyth 2007);
regulation of ontogenetic transformations (Ramos 2012);
modulation of nutrient metabolism (Zmora et al. 2017);
establishment of mutualistic relationships with commensals
(Kurashima and Kiyono 2017);
regulation of sexual partner selection and prevention of fusion
between genetically discordant individuals (Davis 2014);
modulation of neuro-functions by affecting mood, memory,
cognition, social behavior and spatial learning (Derecki et al. 2010;
Filiano et al. 2016); and
participation in a bidirectional crosstalk with other bodily
cells by means of a variety of growth factors and metabolic regulatory
signals (Burzyn, Benoist, and Mathis 2013; Davies et al. 2013).
Thus, by responding to the inner and outer environments of the
organism, the immune system participates in many capacities to
coordinate diverse physiological functions and to provide
communication between them. Immunity thus relies upon cognitive
functions coupled to an array of effector mechanisms that have
wide-ranging regulative, reparative, and defensive capabilities.
Beyond the philosophical significance of these immune-mediated
functions, studies of immunity are uniquely positioned to address
central problems in
philosophy of biology (see entry)
and, more broadly, philosophy of science. These include the
reductionism/holism debate, the characterization of the goals and
methods of systems biology, the organization of cognition and
information, and the challenge of integrating complexity theory with
big data studies.
Despite the multifaceted role of the immune system and its importance
in promoting survival and persistence of all forms of life (Pradeu
2012: 22–32), immunology has traditionally been of minor
interest to philosophers of biology (cf. Hull and Ruse 2007; Sarkar
and Plutynski 2010). However, increased attention has recently been
directed to address a range of ontological and epistemological
problems related to immune phenomena. These studies have focused upon
the “immune self”, the central motif of biological
identity in the context of immunity (Tauber 1994; Pradeu 2012).
Ranging over diverse topics, including personal identity (Howes 1999),
ethical and anthropological concerns with human self-image (Sontag
1990; E. Martin 1994), and poststructuralist, constructivist and
feminist notions of identity (Derrida 2003; Haraway 1989; Weasel
2001), philosophers have invoked immunological conceptions of
selfhood. Moreover, the examination of immunology has proven
increasingly useful in addressing philosophical problems pertaining to
other fields of study such as ecology (Tauber 2017), neuro- and
cognitive sciences (Varela et al. 1988), developmental biology (Fagan
2007), microbiology (Méthot and Alizon 2014) and evolutionary
biology (Hull, Langman, and Glenn 2001). This increased recognition of
immunology in philosophy of biology not only reflects a growing trend
towards more inclusive approaches, more generally, but also
contributes to the intensifying effort to understand ecological
dynamics that range from microbial interactions to climate change
(O’Malley and Dupre 2007; O’Malley 2014).
Immunologists have long applied philosophy to elaborate conceptual
frameworks for understanding the immune system and to shed light on
the character of experimental conduct in this biomedical field
(Anderson 2014). To highlight the common culture of immunology and
philosophy, a prominent Australian immunologist, Macfarlane Burnet,
wrote in 1965: “Immunology has always seemed to me more a
problem in philosophy than in practical science” (Burnet 1965).
He was inspired by Whitehead in elaborating his notion of immune
selfhood and by his attempts to apply cybernetics and information
theory to immunology (Anderson and Mackay 2014). Another influential,
philosophically-oriented immunologist, Niels Jerne, admitted to having
been influenced by Kierkegaard’s discussion of Plato’s
Meno
when elaborating his key conceptual ideas (i.e., the
selection theory of antibody production) (Jerne 1966, Söderqvist
2003: 186). And perhaps most prominently, Ludwik Fleck’s
immunological and bacteriological research served as the case example
of a “thought collective” that has served as the founding
study of the social character of scientific change in biology and
science (Löwy 1986; Fagan 2009; see the entry on
Ludwik Fleck
).
 Many other prominent immunological researchers, including
Metchnikoff, Zinsser, Medawar, Edelman and Salk, were also humanist
thinkers who, in addition to active laboratory research, conspicuously
expounded philosophical ideas on the nature of reality, the character
of cognition, the limits of science, the condition of humankind, and
the like. Thus, a rich bidirectional exchange between philosophy and
immunology has been established over a long tradition.
2. Organism-Level Functions of the Immune System
The basic schema of vertebrate immunity consists of two evolutionary
distinct ways to perceive the organism’s external environment
and to monitor its inner state. The first modality, more primitive and
less refined in its perceptive mechanisms, is referred to as the
“innate” or “natural” immune system. This arm
of immunity is composed of a variety of primordial
phagocytes—“eating cells”—possessing
distinctive characteristics based on their tissue distribution. They
ingest particulate microbes and destroy effete, cancerous, and damaged
host cells. These immunocytes constitute the first line of the immune
encounter and comprise the “resting” state of
physiological immunity as they “police” on-going processes
of surveillance and restoration. This system has autonomous functions,
but the incorporation of antigen (a substance that stimulates an
immune response) may also lead to integration with the second mode of
immunity, the so called, “acquired” immune system. This
second arm of immunity has evolved mechanisms that are highly specific
in their recognition capabilities and exhibit immune
“memory” of previous sensitization. Acquired immunity is
mediated by several classes of lymphocytes that may be stimulated by
phagocyte first-encounters or as primary responders under certain
pathological conditions. The B-lymphocytes produce antibody that
recognizes antigens by structural homology and, correspondingly,
T-cells have specific antigen-matching receptors on their cell
surface. The initial recognition event leads to activation of a
variety of effector reactions that destroy the immune target. However,
the decision not to respond is also a recognition event and results in
immune “tolerance”. Both the innate and acquired immune
cellular elements are regulated by a vast array of soluble molecular
factors that serve to either activate or dampen immune responses. The
complexity of diverse cell types, the mediators of their interactions,
the contextual determinants that determine immune reactivity, and the
wide range of physiological functions in which immunity participates,
has defied comprehensive modeling. Consequently, immunology offers a
fecund example of biological organizational complexity, which, in
turn, leads to the fundamental philosophical question: On what basis
is organismal identity established and maintained?
Immunology, from its earliest inception, has been concerned with
biological
identity
—its establishment and maintenance.
In its original iteration, immunity was conceived as that function
that preserved the
integrity
of the organism in terms of
protecting and restoring its
individuality
. Thus, immune
functions testified to the persistence of a stable, core identity
defined in terms of its insularity and autonomy. Indeed,
individuality
undergirded the science from its inception, for
the defense against pathogens was framed by an attacked patient
(individual) pitted against alien others, the invaders. In this
scenario, distinct borders mark individual identity, and immunity is
the response to the violation of those boundaries. However, challenges
to this conception of immunity have recently appeared. Emphasizing the
contextual placement of the organism, notions of demarcated boundaries
that have characterized traditional definitions of the organism are
being revised.
Generally understood, an individual replicates itself and possesses
anatomic borders, a harmonious communication between its parts, a
division of labor for the benefit of the whole, and a system of
hierarchical dominance and control. By these criteria, the immune
system is responsible for establishing and maintaining the integrity
of such an individual (Pradeu 2016). However, symbiosis challenges
this entrenched definition of the individual organism: shared
physiologies govern homeostasis; anatomic margins lose clear
definition; development is intertwined among several phylogenetically
defined entities; and the unit of evolutionary selection becomes a
multiplex genome (see the entry on
the biological notion of individual
).
 On this consortium view, notions of individuality are replaced with
c
omplexes
of organisms that defy any singular definition of
organismal identity as independent agents (Löwy 1991; S. Gilbert,
Sapp, and Tauber 2012). In terms of commensal relationships,
symbiosis, mediated by immune tolerance, signifies stabilized
adaptation to the complex of diverse living elements that live in a
cohesive ecology, both within and external to the traditional borders
of the organism. When oriented by ecological relationships, immunology
moves from its dominant concern with autonomous individuality to
include the science of cooperative assemblies of organisms. The
ontological implications of this re-formulation are highly significant
for philosophical considerations of identity as discussed below (see
the entry on
identity
).
2.1 Diachronic identity
The diachronic identity of an organism, its capacity to remain the
same despite transformations, has puzzled philosophers since ancient
Greece. Aristotle postulated the existence of immutable forms, that,
being distinct from fluctuating matter, ensure the continued identity
of living creatures (
Categories
,
3b22–33;
Metaphysics
, Book D).  Dissatisfied with this
solution, Locke proposed that temporal identity of animals and plants
is not ensured by their unvarying forms, but rather by the continuity
of their lived life (Locke 1689, II.27.4 and II.27.8; Kaufman
2016). In the context of contemporary philosophy of biology, the
importance of continuous identity was emphasized by Hull who argued
that species lack essences and thus should be considered historical
individuals with their own inner coherence and persistence conditions
not unlike those of other living creatures (Hull 1978). He assumed
that these persistence conditions are provided by continuity of
changes in biological organization of these individuals so that only
an abrupt disruption could cause a loss or change of identity (Hull
1992; Hull 1978: 355).  This latter perspective has recently been
adopted by advocates of animalism, who argue that continuity of
physiological processes (organic animalism) or maintenance of
characteristic structural organization (somatic animalism) are
necessary for diachronic identity (Olson 1997; van Inwagen 1990;
Mackie 1999; see the entry on
animalism
).
Immunology steps into the diachronic identity debate with
Burnet’s hypothesis that during embryonic development, the
immune system learns to tolerate a defined set of molecules as
“self” (Burnet 1959: 59). He proposed that autoreactive
immune cells (lymphocytes) were purged during embryonic development to
leave only those lymphocytes that ignore specific antigens encountered
during this early stage (Burnet 1957). Defined negatively by a gap in
the lymphocyte repertoire, immunological selfhood was assumed to
persist in the adult as an invariant molecular ‘essence’
of the organism, analogous to an unwavering psychological ego (Burnet
1959; Tauber 1994: 194). As observed by Pradeu and Carosella, this
self/nonself model supported a substantialist view of identity in so
far as it presupposed that the immune system ensures integrity of a
preserved metaphysical core (Pradeu and Carosella 2006a: 246).
To provide a distinct view of the immune system’s role in
diachronic identity, Pradeu advocates the so-called
“genidentity” view (Pradeu 2018). On this view, two
objects are identical if their states are continuously connected over
time (Lewin 1922). To specify which continuous states ensure temporal
identity of an organism, Pradeu refers to those “immune
interactions [that] isolate some continuous biochemical interactions,
which in turn individuate the organism” (Pradeu 2012:
248–249). Accordingly, the immune system reacts to rapid
molecular alterations in the pattern of biochemical interactions and
thus helps to ensure that these interactions are continuous and
unperturbed. Of note, which continuous process should be followed to
define diachronic identity is not observer independent and must be
adjusted to a particular theoretical perspective (Guay and Pradeu
2016: 318; Pradeu 2018).
However, the idea that the immune system contributes to organismal
identity
maintenance
has to be weighed against evidence
suggesting that immunity contributes to the accommodation of
change
. At the end of the nineteenth century, Metchnikoff
proposed that phagocytes (primitive immune cells) were agents of
organismal transformation, driving metamorphic and developmental
alterations (Metchnikoff 1901 [1905]; Tauber and Chernyak 1991). This
early view has been supported by recent evidence that the immune
system actively participates in mediating transformations in
organismal identity by constantly redefining and modulating immune
reactivity towards endogenous and exogenous molecules (Tauber 2017).
This is most apparent during development as illustrated by the
activity of brain-resident macrophages (microglia), which, by
impacting angiogenesis/vascularization, as well as the migration,
proliferation and apoptosis of neurons, influence social behavioral
and sexual identity (Wynn, Chawla, and Pollard.2013; Lenz and Nelson
2018).
Tolerance of newly encountered antigens demonstrates the
“fluid” state of the reactive immune repertoire that
undergoes alteration over the lifespan of the organism (Grignolio et
al. 2014). And with a changing “immune biography”,
biological identity no longer conforms to the simple binary division
of self and nonself that has hitherto characterized immune
theorizing. Accordingly, animals have no immutable molecular essence
that would ensure persistence of identity, at least as determined by
immune tolerance or rejection (León-Letelier, Bonifaz, and
Fuentes-Pananá 2019). Identity then becomes an ever-changing
process of accepted transformations and rejected entries. From this
vantage point, the animalist definitions of diachronic identity as a
mere persistence of life or even an underlying constancy fails to
account for the dynamic quality of immune-mediated identity
transitions (van Inwagen 1990: 148–149; Olson 1997; Mackie 1999;
Roy and Hebrok 2015; Dupré 2017). Consequently, the immune
processual point of view defines organismal persistence as “a
coordinated
group of changes” rather than as an
invariant state or a continuous connection between such states. This
understanding has important implications for philosophy of biology and
ontology, more generally (Dupré 2014; Nicholson and Dupre 2018;
Meincke 2018).
2.2 Synchronic identity
While
diachronic
identity of an organism is understood as its
persistence though time,
synchronic
identity is defined in
terms of its individuality or distinctiveness (Sober 2000: 154).
Attempts have been made to identify distinguishing characteristics
such as functional autonomy, possession of mutually interdependent
parts, genetic homogeneity and spatial boundaries (Clarke 2010).
Others, pointing to the heterogeneous character of biological
individuals, have argued that no sole feature can serve as a universal
determinant of individuality (see the entry on
the biological notion of individual
).
 Part of the contention resides in differing frames of reference of
study: Most considerations of synchronic individuality focus upon
evolutionary
individuals as units of selection (Gould and
Lloyd 1999) that differs from how
physiological
individuals
might be distinguished (Pradeu 2016). Regardless of their involvement
in evolution, organisms exhibit various levels of physiological and
morphological integration that makes their indivisibility problematic
(Godfrey-Smith 2009). Immunology contributes to discussions of
individuality in this latter sense by considering the role of the
immune system in defining the boundaries of the organism by the
functional measures of rejection or assimilation.
Pradeu formulated such criteria and proposed that the immune system
plays the central role in determining what is included in the organism
and what is not (Pradeu 2012). The differentiation is based on his
continuity/discontinuity model, which depicts the immune system
reacting to transient alterations in the pattern of antigen receptor
interactions and tolerates long-lasting modifications (Pradeu, Jaeger,
& Vivier 2013; Pradeu & Carosella 2006a: 241, 2006b). Such a
mechanism is based on recognizing that autoimmunity is a normal
function of immunity (Tauber 2015). Because host antigens do not evoke
an immune response, a stable, “continuity” of immune
interactions establishes an activation threshold that initiates an
immune response only upon a rapid increase in antigenic load. The
immune system thus distinguishes the stable state of tolerant
recognition of tonic signals arising from normal physiological process
in contrast to the appearance of novel antigens, for example, arising
from pathogen invasion or tissue injury (Grossman and Paul 1992;
Myers, Zikherman and Roose 2017; Pradeu 2012: 246; Grossman 2019).
Thus the development of tolerance to frequently encountered antigens,
commensals, tissue grafts and anastomosed animals results in the
establishment of stable, integrated associations mediated by low-grade
immune interactions (Pradeu and Carosella 2006a, 2006b; Pradeu 2012:
251–252). In this formulation, the immune system plays a central
role in defining an individual by permitting beneficial physiological
inclusion of heterologous components.
Others refer to these stable immune interactions with microbiota to
deny
that organisms are individuals (S. Gilbert, Sapp, and
Tauber 2012). Appreciating the ubiquity of symbiosis, the immune
system from this point of view becomes a key mediator of the holobiont
by tolerating and coordinating microbial-host relationships. On this
basis, these critics highlight that most of these interactions fall on
a dynamic spectrum of rejection and acceptance making it impossible,
in principle
, to determine the boundaries of individuality.
Symbiotic interactions do not conform to a simple acceptance-rejection
model. Rather, to attune its responses to microbial signals the immune
system launches a broad spectrum of T-cell reactions in combination
with a variety of innate immune and tissue cell-derived signals
(cytokines, hormones, neurotransmitters) in combination with complex
regulatory controls (Eberl 2016). As suggested by Cohen, immunity is
the product of an active computational state that constantly assesses
the state of the organism’s internal state and the surroundings
in which it lives (Cohen 2007a, 2007b). In the context of such fluid
activity, transitioning from one unique activation state to another
does not allow definitive delineation of organismal borders. Instead,
the immune system acts as gatekeeper that controls the apparent
boundary between the organism and its environment (Tauber 2008: 231; Tauber 2017; S. Gilbert, Sapp, and Tauber 2012). From this perspective, the view of immunity as protecting insularity shifts to recognizing its role in establishing and maintaining communal
relationships that blur the distinction of an atomistic
insular
individuality (Skillings 2016).
The self/nonself, tolerance/response dichotomies collapse altogether,
when considered in the context of mammalian pregnancy, where various
modalities are employed to preserve the temporary immune sanctuary of
the ‘foreign’ fetus (Howes 2007; A. Martin 2010). Studies
of immune-mediated exchanges between the mother and the fetus not only
challenge our view of immunity as concerned with rejection and
defense, but also transform our understanding of biological
individuality (Erlebacher 2013; Howes 2008). More specifically, recent
studies undermine the vision of the maternal immune system as
antagonistic to the fetus and rather point to active immune
participation in the formation of an amalgamated maternal-fetal
individual, whose ontological status lies at the continuum between
unification and distinctiveness (Howes 2008). Delineation of the role
of inflammation during blastocyst implantation further supports this
interactive vision, demonstrating that instead of acting as a
rejection response, inflammation promotes a mutually tolerant fusion
between the embryo and the mother (Griffith et al. 2017; Mor, Aldo,
and Alvero 2017). Indeed, the transformation of an
inflammation-induced reaction pathway into a cell differentiation
pathway in decidual stromal cells exhibits the intimate connection of
the immune and reproductive systems in eutherians (G. Wagner,
Erkenbrack, and Love 2019; Nuño de la Rosa, Pavlicev, and
Etxeberria 2019, in Other Internet Resources).
In conclusion, despite significant contributions of philosophy of
immunology to debates about identity, no straightforward answer to the
question of how the immune system contributes to biological
individuality has been offered. Considering the actual
individualization practices in various fields of biology, it may well
be concluded that no single account of the biological individual
suffices and that the question of whether particular criteria are
valid or not depends on the research perspective adopted. Part of the
conundrum may lie in the efforts to consider the issue at the
metaphysical, rather than at the epistemological level (Love 2018,
Love and Brigandt 2017). As discussed below, the status of the
“immune self” is a fecund case in point.
2.3 The immune self
Wide use of the self/nonself distinction in different clinical and
research traditions (provided by the relaxed and varied meanings
associated with its use) has established such discrimination as the
governing construct of the science (e.g., Howes 2010; Hoffman 2012;
Cohn 2015). Indeed, the “immune self” has served as
immunology’s foundational concept to order immune theorizing for
the past 70 years (Burnet and Fenner 1949; Tauber 1994). However,
despite the paradigm’s established standing, definition of
immune identity has proven elusive. As discussed above (section 2.1),
because of fluctuations of immune activity over the lifespan of the
organism, conceptualizing and modeling active tolerance have yet to
yield criteria for defining stable identity (Bilate and LaFaille
2012). Moreover, a consensus definition of selfhood has remained
elusive inasmuch as different investigative frameworks promote
differing characteristics of immune identity based on their respective
structural and functional criteria (Matzinger 1994). Critics have
therefore questioned the immune self’s standing and utility
(e.g., Matzinger 1994; Tauber 2000; Pradeu 2012). The latter position
argues that the “self” might be better regarded as only a
metaphor for a “figure” outlined by the immune
system’s silence, i.e., its non-reactivity. Such a functionally
flexible definition has been resisted. Defenders argue that the notion
of stabilized discrimination correctly depicts the immune
system’s organizing functions (which converge on defending a
well-demarcated organism), and that efforts to eliminate or modify
this metaphor are misguided attempts to “police” borders
between science and culture (Anderson 2014; Hoffman 2012). Drawing
from the philosophical canon, Howes referred to Hume to argue that
realism about self (immune or otherwise) can be saved despite the
dependency of context and the ever-changing character of the
postulated ego (Howes 1998). She suggested that the efforts to deny
the reality of the self are based on its non-substantial character and
thus reflects entrenched substantialist assumptions. She proposed that
a middle ground exists between substantial self and no-self by
adopting a processual, understanding of selfhood (Howes 1999).
While the standing of the immune self has remained contentious,
epistemological ambiguity and flexible polysemy has proven effective
in sustaining the term’s powerful heuristic value as an
idiom
with many uses and meanings (Crist and Tauber 2000).
Its versatility and pragmatic utility have effectively integrated
clinical immune phenomena by highlighting the essential similarity or
interconnectedness of diverse immune-mediated processes in response to
various clinical challenges. Thus nutrition, allergy, infection,
autoimmune disease, various phenomena of tolerance, natural or
experimentally created chimeras (transplantation), and autoimmunity
all become conceived as a network of interlinked or interrelated
functions subject to evolutionary transformation and adaption. As
these topics mirror and play off one another under the rubric of
selfhood, immunologists have a ready means by which to represent
states or processes that arise in the various interactions between the
organism and its environment at different evolutionary stages and
development.
Finally, the self’s appearance in immunology served as a readily
understood shorthand reference to personal identity, and the efforts
to substantiate that extrapolation on its own terms guided the
discipline for the latter half of the twentieth century (for
historical case studies see Löwy 1991). After all, beyond the
experimental science, the interpretative context of immune selfhood
draws from wider social meanings of individuality and insularity
(Tauber 2016; see below, section 5.0). The autonomous construction of
identity resonates with Western civic ideals and in turn supports them
by melding laboratory findings with various extrapolated or borrowed
philosophical, political and psychological formulations of human
agency. And conversely, immunology has been studied as a source of
important metaphors and other tropes feeding back on the
science’s supporting culture to transform understanding of
agency and communal relationships (discussed below, section 5.0).
3. Immune Ecology and Evolution
Immunology’s basic conceptual orientation is undergoing
expansion from an individuality-based biology to include communal
ecological perspectives. Similar shifts in perspective have also taken
place in other fields of biology (Nathan 2014; van Baalen and Huneman
2014), and thus immunology joins a proliferation of
“sub-organismal” environmental studies that would
integrate ecology with developmental biology, physiology, cancer
biology, molecular eco-systems, and eco-immunology (S. Gilbert and
Epel 2015; Karasov, Martínez del Rio, and Caviedes-Vidal 2011;
Maley et al. 2017; Tauber 2017). This emerging perspective is
accompanied by an increasing interest in somatic evolution occurring
during carcinogenesis, neurogenesis, microbiota development, and the
adaptive immune responses. This shift has led to an abandonment of the
classical vision of the immune system directed at defense to now
include tolerant mechanisms that permit assimilation and co-habitation
that reflect stabilized microbial-host relationships. In that
re-orientation, concepts of pathogenicity and individuality have been
re-defined.
So, although the concepts of immunity were developed primarily in the
context of disease ecology, attention is shifting to symbiotic
ecosystems. The exchanges the immune system mediates highlight context
sensitivity of parasitism, commensalism and mutualism, and further
demonstrates the bidirectional dialogue between bacteria and the host
in the mutual construction of their respective ecological niches. The
problem of immune evolution and clonal selection of lymphocytes is
considered, in turn, to provide the most general account of natural
selection. An important new issue concerns a set of problems
associated with the recently discovered adaptive immune system of
bacteria, the CRISPR system, whose role in evolution poses novel
challenges to basic Darwinian principles (see section 3.2).
3.1 Ecological approaches to immunity
The ideas underpinning somatic ecology originate in the early view of
somatic cells behaving as social organisms forming stable associations
(Reynolds 2018: 12–58). Assuming that such interactions serve
the welfare of the organism, Virchow and other authors described a
“cell state” (or a “cell republic)”, a
metaphoric expression of what became a sociological model of cellular
communication (Virchow 1858 [1863]; R. Wagner 1999; Reynolds 2018:
86–113). And pathologically, such a consortium becomes a
“civil war” of competing cell lines. The model then led to
a general Darwinian formulation of an
internal
struggle for
existence throughout the life of an individual (Roux 1881; Metchnikoff
1901 [1905]; Tauber and Chernyak 1991; see Buss 1987; Queller and Strassmann 2009;
Godfrey-Smith 2009 for the contemporary standing of this proposal of
evolutionary change). Metchnikoff, a key advocate of this theory,
assumed that cells operate on Darwinian principles similar to those
governing the adaptation of organisms in changing environmental
conditions. He thus introduced a common framework in which to
understand dynamic biological communities—whether internal cell
lines or organisms adjusting to their environment. This ecological
orientation altered basic conceptions of immunity and identity by
displacing static notions of individuality with dialectical constructs
(Levins and Lewontin 1985; Tauber 2008).
This ecological viewpoint serves to depict somatic and microbial cell
populations as systems of communication and information exchange. With
the change in focus from individuals to ecosystems, the classical
dichotomies governing immunology’s theory, i.e.,
tolerance/responsiveness, immune/non-immune, self/nonself, has been
revised. How these oppositions collapse in an information-based
ecological format is illustrated by the phenomenon of inter-kingdom
signaling, a form of communication that not only bridges an
evolutionary gap between microbes and host, but also helps to overcome
putative boundaries between immune, epithelial, and neural systems
(cf. Hughes and Sperandio 2008). When considered from the
environmental perspective, the transition site between the genetic
body and its resident microbes is no longer a frontline of defense but
rather an ecological ecotone, an interactive zone at which cellular
communities engage in a dialogue to explore new adaptive opportunities
(Tauber 2008). The importance of such interfaces is well illustrated
by mutual scaffolding and niche construction strategies that are
utilized by microbial symbionts and their hosts to direct development
of larger ecological units (i.e., holobionts) (Chiu and S. Gilbert
2015).
Struggle and cooperation in the immune context were assumed since Koch
to depend on intrinsic characteristics of invading microbes that, due
to their virulence factors and other gene-encoded characteristics, act
as pathogens, commensals or mutualists (Méthot and Alizon
2014). By accounting for a larger context of the immune encounter, the
ecological position challenges this vision by offering a view in which
“there are no pathogens, no commensals, and no opportunists;
instead there are only microbes and hosts that interact”
unpredictably (Casadevall and Pirofski 2015). In this scenario,
microbial virulence becomes an emergent property, dependent on host
and microbial factors, whose interactions cannot be derived from first
principles (Casadevall, Fang, and Pirofski 2011).
In sum, the ecological view has led to the view that boundaries
between parasitism, commensalism and mutualism are changeable and
fluid, dependent on host factors, the full microbiota, and the broader
environmental context (temperature, nutrients, etc.) (Méthot
and Alizon 2014). Current views of plasticity, pathogenicity, and
virulence revitalizes the nineteenth-century concept of microbial-host
equilibrium (Méthot 2012). In the context of disease ecology,
long-lasting associations between hosts and parasites leads to a
climax state in which the respective populations remain stable (Burnet
and White 1972; Anderson 2004). The immune equilibrium model then
depicts persistent viral colonization as a product of a “dynamic
but metastable equilibrium between the virome and the host”
(Virgin, Wherry, and Ahmed 2009; Eberl 2010). Thus, the modern idea of
balance
highlights a stable state in which offensive and
defensive forces neutralize one another to form stable associations
between parasites and the host with little damage to either partner
(Swiatczak 2014).
3.2 Immunity and evolution
The environmental perspective not only refers to the application of
ecological and evolutionary knowledge to immune modeling, but also
includes lessons learned from studies of immunity that reciprocally
inform current understanding of evolution. How these findings shed
light on the character of evolutionary change is well illustrated by
the research of inheritable immune variation. The origin of variation
has been subject to much debate in philosophy of biology. Advocates of
the view that nonrandom, environmentally induced factors are involved
in the generation of inheritable variation cite evidence of
stress-induced mutagenesis, horizontal gene transfer, and non-genetic
systems of inheritance (Koonin 2012: 257–291). Such discoveries
suggest that organisms may enhance their own adaptation to altered
environmental conditions epigenetically (Jablonka and Lamb 2014; J.
Shapiro 2011). Specialized diversification and recombination
mechanisms that are used by organisms to enhance their own adaptation
are considered Lamarckian in so far as the response to specific
environmental cues leads to alterations of phenotypic features, and
these adaptive characteristics may be transmitted to succeeding
generations (Sarkar 1991; Depew and Weber 1996). Notwithstanding
evidence for such mechanisms, postulated non-random mechanisms of
evolution have been disputed by those who claim that appeals to
Lamarckism are misguided and stem from mis-interpreting the
Neo-Darwinian synthesis or from overlooking genes as the basic units
of selection (Merlin 2010; Weiss 2015). With a focus on rapidly
adapting and evolving cell populations, immunological studies provide
a unique opportunity to investigate evolution in real time and to
understand the role of non-random, inheritable alterations of the
phenotype.
Examination of adaptive immunity in prokaryotes provides a major
breakthrough in this controversy. Many bacteria and most Archaea
undergo non-random changes directed at devising protection from
invasive bacteriophages and mobile genetic elements (Horvath and
Barrangou 2010). These microbes use specialized methods of defense,
CRISPR (Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats)-Cas
(CRISPR-associated protein) systems to incorporate foreign DNA
fragments into their genomes (Koonin 2019). These become templates for
the formation of RNA molecules, which when associated with
endonuclease enzymes, mediate destruction of the complementary,
foreign DNA fragments. These acquired adaptive changes are a direct
consequence of the organism’s interactions with the environment,
and, because these modifications can be passed on to succeeding
generations, the CRISPR-Cas system has been suggested to operate on
Lamarckian principles, an interpretation that has been contested
(Koonin 2012: 265; Koonin 2019; Pradeu 2019). Although not conforming to the neo-Darwinian model, this system lacks the teleological character postulated by Lamarck, and thus should be considered, at most, a model of directed mutagenesis (Wideman et al. 2019; Woolley et al. 2019; Weiss 2015).
Others counter that a continuum of Lamarckian-Darwinian mechanisms
exists in nature and that CRISPR-Cas represents a genuine case of
Lamarckinism (Jablonka 2019; Koonin and Wolf 2016). Advocates of this latter interpretation place CRISPR-Cas systems among other apparently Lamarckian mechanisms like those mediating epigenetic inheritance
(Gissis and Jablonka 2011).
Highlighting the importance of directed mutagenesis and programmed
gene rearrangements in evolution, these studies potentially revise
dominant theories of adaptation. Indeed, such genetic changes operate
in the vertebrate adaptive immune system: The first exposure of
antigen leads to selection of a diverse population of lymphocytes,
each carrying antigen receptors of a single specificity with varying
degrees of affinity for the newly introduced antigen; the stochastic
but coordinated assembly of gene segments determines receptor binding
fitness (Tonegawa, et al. 1974; Podolsky and Tauber 1997). Higher
degrees of specificity arise through a class of lymphocytes (B cells),
whose activation by a specific antigen induces further variation and
selection. This mechanism exhibits hypermutation, in which rearranged
antigen receptor genes are subjected to scattered, random point
mutations to permit rapid selection of a cell variant with an enhanced
binding fitness. As the process of hypermutation acts on pre-selected
cells to improve adaptive fit of their receptors, its outcomes are
partially biased, failing to exactly fit into the Neo-Darwinian scheme
(cf. Dobzhansky 1970). Thus, in the course of antigenic exposure, the
population of lymphocytes that recognize a newly introduced antigen
collectively generates an increasingly effective pool of responsive
cells by fine-tuning the specificity of immune receptors, a process
that exemplifies non-random selection and adaptation (Simon,
Hollander, and McMichael 2015).
Further revising our understanding of adaptation is the observation that maternal antibodies may be passed on to descendants, allowing progeny to inherit some of the acquired immune characteristics of their parents. An example of such vertical immune transfer has been found in
studies of the composition of the microbiota mothers pass on to the
infant through vaginal and breastfeeding routes that program the
newborn’s immune system and metabolism (Mueller et al. 2015;
Gomez de Agüero et al. 2016). By molding the composition of its
microbiota during pregnancy, the mother’s immune system
engineers its environment by constructing a microbial model for her
offspring (Chiu and S. Gilbert 2015; Mueller et al. 2015). When dysbiotic
microbial populations are transmitted by obese mothers, their
metabolic abnormalities and associated pro-inflammatory phenotype are
imprinted upon their children (Soderborg et al. 2018; Ley et al.
2005). Due to the reliance on microbial niche construction, the
acquisition of an infant’s immune characteristics is an instance
of ecological inheritance, where transmission of selective pressures
from one generation to another pre-sets the process of the
progeny’s adaptation to the environment (Odling-Smee, Laland,
and Feldman 2003; Odling-Smee et al. 2013; Chiu and S. Gilbert 2015).
Alterations in this ecological mode of immune transmission in humans
by C-section or administration of antibiotics may compromise the
health of the child and thus predispose them to a variety of
immune-related disorders (e.g., allergy and autoimmunity) (Bokulich et
al. 2016). Thus, adaptive immunity exhibits various modalities in which variation may be generated and transferred from one generation to another. These findings challenge traditional Darwinian and Lamarckian categories, with wide-ranging ramifications.
Finally, immunology contributes to a general account of selection
(Darden and Cain 1989; Hull, Langman, and Glenn 2001). The clonal
selection theory (CST), the foundational framework of modern
immunology, states that the immune system relies on a Darwinian-like
process of selection to permit differential expansion of lymphocytes,
whose receptors are fitted to bind an antigen (Burnet 1959). Analogies
between CST, natural selection theory, and selective theories in
neuroscience have been generally regarded as examples of “a
selection type theory” (Darden and Cain 1989). CST has also been
compared to other selective theories to elaborate a general vision
of selection as cycles of replication, variation and environmental
interaction (Hull, Langman, and Glenn 2001). Such a general account of
selection would not only elucidate the most fundamental principles of
evolution, but would also serve as a guide for future selective
theories, e.g., neural group selection (cf. Edelman 1974, 1987).
Differences between selection theories have also been recognized and
suggest that unlike evolution of species, selection in somatic systems
(in particular the neural system) does not fully account for the
adaptation of the developing populations (Dumouchel 1996). More
generally, Piattelli-Palmarini suggested that such a general scheme
could be of use in cognitive science and linguistics, as well as in
other disciplinary domains outside of biology (Piattelli-Palmarini
1986).
4. The Character of Immunological Knowledge
Case studies of immunology have contributed to understanding the role
of models and the structure of theory in the biomedical sciences (see
the entry on
models in science
).
 For example, Schaffner provided detailed analysis of the clonal
selection theory and the two-component theory of the immune response
to elaborate his criticism of the classical view of scientific
theories and to provide an account in which middle range theories,
consisting of interrelated theoretical models, organize subject areas
in biology (Schaffner 1980). A taxonomy of immune models (both
conceptual and experimental) exhibit a mosaic of methodologies and
theoretical ways in which information is obtained and integrated in
this field (Baetu 2014). Furthermore, high throughput sequencing
techniques and other “omics” approaches in immunology,
like those of microbial ecology, are increasingly utilizing new
analytical tools (cf. Huss 2014). In conjunction with systems biology
approaches, these tools inspire engineering orientations, in which
biological systems achieve robustness and stability through the same
principles with which machines are built, namely using system controls
(e.g., feedback), redundancy (e.g., gene duplication, alternative
metabolic pathways), modular design (to minimize damage to local
units), and structural stability (Kitano 2001: 18). Apart from serving
as an exemplar of systems-based theories and models, immunology has
also been employed to develop cognitivist models, elucidate conceptual
and theoretical change in biology, and elaborate on contentious issues
about reductionism and anti-reductionism.
4.1. Cognitivist models
The rise of the cognitive paradigm in immunology originated in
conceiving the immune system as a faculty of perception. Immunologists
explicitly describe macrophages “seeing” antigen;
antibodies “recognizing” epitopes; T cell possessing
“memory”; and adaptive immunity comprising a
“learning” process. Such extensions from human psychology
have been widely utilized in evolutionary history (Margulis,
Asikainen, and Krumbein 2011), wherein basic categories of human
cognition have been extrapolated to animals (Bekoff, Allen, and
Burghardt 2002), bacteria (Ben Jacob et al. 2004; Ben Jacob, Shapira,
and Tauber 2005), cancer cells (Ben Jacob, Coffey, and Levine 2012)
and the immune system (Cohen 1992a, 1992b). The influence of the
cognitive metaphor (where intention plays an incipient role) appears
throughout immune theory with extrapolations to cognitive science more
generally (Varela 1994: 36; Varela et al. 1988; Varela and Coutinho
1991; Vaz 2011b).
Models of cognition in immune theorizing have been extended from human
cognitive science and linguistics, where representational and
anti-representationalist orientations have vied for dominance (Tauber
2013). The dominant model regards the immune response integrating two
steps: First, the immune system perceives molecular targets and then
“decides” how to react (Cohen 1992a). Accordingly,
“perception” is primary and effector functions (activation
or tolerance) follow along a spectrum of responses. This understanding
of immune cognition construes immunity as an information-processing
faculty, where immune activity becomes a computational process
involving algorithmic transformation of an antigenic input into an
effector output (Cohen 2007b).
This cognitivist orientation is of special interest to philosophers,
in so far as such an examination provokes questions concerning the
ontological status of intentionality, the role of representation, and
the character of cognitive processing in general. Indeed,
immunology’s cognitive models carry the promise of revitalizing
some of the key issues prevalent in cognitive science by placing them
into the context of a system whose circulating components interact in
a probabilistic manner (Varela et al. 1988; Tauber 2017:
129–161; Cohen 2000: 57–99). Such a “fluid
brain” carries wide-ranging theoretical implications (Fridman
1991).
Shared nervous-immune system organizational characteristics have been
proposed (Nataf 2016). As in the visual processing areas of the brain,
where distinct features of a visual object (shape, color, motion) are
perceived separately by distinct neuronal populations (C. Gilbert
2013), the immune system utilizes dedicated cells and receptors to
process fragmentary signals that discern distinct features of its
environment (Swiatczak, Rescigno, and Cohen 2011). These signals are
then integrated by higher-level processing, which, by computing
information from their respective “receptive fields”,
produce a unified representation of the antigen. Such a distributed
image parallels activities of higher cortical areas. So, analogous to
the nervous system, the immune system perceives immune objects by
assembling discrete signals (immunogens, cytokines, chemokines, etc.)
obtained as informational elements derived from various cell types,
which, in an ascending integration, generate a multitude of T-cell and
B-cell responses (Nataf 2016). In this schema, the integrative process
occurring in lymphoid aggregates is the functional equivalent to the
brain that employs an analogous hierarchal structure to process
information. Indeed, the nervous and immune systems are highly
integrated, both physiologically and anatomically. They share many of
the same messenger molecules, have close developmental histories both
in phylogeny and ontogeny, and intersect biochemically (Ader
2006).
The so-called “psycho-neuro-endocrine system” has a
well-established fourth partner in the immune system showing that its
activity cannot be understood in isolation from these other systems.
The models employed in one cognitive system are readily shared by the
other and thus propagate underlying theoretical approaches and
implicit directives. Postulating molecular-level and systems-level
recognition states carries notions of “intentionality”
(see the entry on
intentionality
).
 Alternatively, instrumentalist and eliminativist approaches argue
that intentional descriptions are either only constructs of a useful
idiom or that they should be dropped altogether (Dennett 1987;
Churchland 1989). Intentional assignments reflect an ordering
mechanism for phenomena otherwise difficult to characterize and thus
susceptible to error (Matthen and Levy 1984). Errors must be
understood in terms of reference to what end a system actually
seemingly
intends
versus what it achieves in given
circumstances. In the immune setting, autoimmunity signifies a
dysregulated state that, in this context, signifies mis-directed
intentionality of normal immune function (Matthen and Levy 1984: 361).
Any attempt to frame this process in non-intentional terms would fail,
as such descriptions do not invoke goals, expectations, unfulfilled
intentions and the like. Accordingly, immunology cannot dispense with
the intentional idiom and the associated psychological metaphors used
in its descriptive language, if even only as a heuristic device
(Rosenberg 1989: 38; Melander 1993: 239; Howes 2000). Strong arguments
have been made that metaphors in the life sciences act as
indispensable instruments of cognition and explanation in addition to
providing a useful perspective on a research subject (Reynolds 2018).
Indeed, despite neo-positivistic efforts to rid science of nonliteral
meanings to permit an objective (neutral) description of nature,
analogical thinking in science plays a variety of crucial epistemic
functions (Hesse 1966; Fox Keller 2002).
4.1.1 Representational models
Advocates of representationalist approaches to immune cognition accept
the subject-object dichotomy that portrays the immune system as a
“knower”, an agent, who can represent the state of its
inner and other environments (Tauber 2013). This has become a
well-entrenched orientation inasmuch as the ontological understanding
of key concepts in immunology—
self, individuality
, and
organism
—revolves around the status of
agency
in immune theorizing. As already mentioned, from the very inception of
the discipline, immunologists have either assumed an implicit identity
that grounds the distinction between self and foreign, or that
identity is explicitly described as an agent at the heart of immune
defense. Traditionally associated with the capacity of an intentional,
conscious being to act (see the entry on
agency
),
 agency has been redefined in philosophy of immunology to refer to the
source of immune activity.
The capacity of the immune system to create representative images
(through ligand-receptor structural homology) and to act on them does
not mean that this system hosts a centralized control unit. Rather, as
advocates of these information-based accounts suggest, immune agency
emerges from collective behavior of individual immune cells, each of
which acts as a “cellular computing machine” (Cohen and Efroni 2019). From this point of view, the apparent complex
“intelligence” of the immune system is a product of multiple cues originating from individual immune cells that function analogously to
joint decisions made by a school of fish. From this cognitive point
view, immunity arises from shared collective information.
4.1.2 Non-representational models
A distinct group of philosophical problems stems from
anti-representationalist approaches to immune cognition. Advocates of
the so-called immune
network theory
challenge the classical
subject-object epistemology as a relationship between the knower and
the known that heretofore has dominated immune theory (Varela 1994:
39). Heralding a shift “from an antigen-centered immunology to
an organism-centered immunology”, this view maintains that
immune agency requires neither representation nor unified control
(Varela 1991). Instead of a hierarchical organizational format, this
de-centered orientation rests on the architecture of the network
theory proposed by Niels Jerne (Jerne 1974). He theorized that if
antibodies of an individual are diverse enough to bind
any
antigen, they also are capable of recognizing one another. Simply,
their mutual interactions must precede any exogenous antigen encounter. Thus, a binding site of one antibody could serve as an antigen to another antibody, which in turn may become the target to still another antibody to create a self-contained, inter-locking
lattice-like network (Jerne 1985). He further proposed that excitatory
and inhibitory forces resulting from antibody interactions establish
an equilibrium state, which, unless upset by an intruding antigen,
ensures stable immune dynamics. Thus, according to Jerne’s
hypothesis, the immune system is a self-referential network made up of
molecules that represent one another and whose reactions against
invasive pathogens were only the
incidental
result of
equilibrating mechanisms that restore stable network dynamics.
In the network schema, cognition is not
of
something;
perception is entirely within the system itself; the agent has
vanished, and with that vacancy, representations are discarded (Vaz
and Varela 1978: 238; Mingers 1991; Coutinho 2003; Palacios and
Bacigalupo 2003; Vaz 2011a). After all,
what
requires a
re
-presentation? In Jerne’s system, no hierarchy
exists, and no cognitive center corresponding to company headquarters.
Instead, what heretofore was referred to as activation resulting from
a subject-object predicate structured cognitive event (described by
stimulus-response language) now refers to increased dynamic activity
that is due to the disruption of the network’s equilibrium.
Accordingly, immune “knowledge” shifts from a
signifier–signified relationship to one in which meaning is
firmly lodged
within
the system itself. Simply, the
subject-object epistemological structure of cognition has been
radically revamped.
Jerne’s provocative hypothesis, although elegant in conception
and effective in inspiring new avenues of research, did not withstand
critical evaluation (Eichmann 2008; Vaz 2011a, 2011b). Despite
confirming the presence of idiotypic antibodies (i.e., mutually
interacting immunoglobulin molecules), their role and overall
contribution to immune functions remained uncertain. Furthermore, the
idea of autonomy and closure contradicted empirical evidence
(Hershberg and Efroni 2001; Coutinho 2003). However, notions of
cognition without agency remained plausible. Pradeu and colleagues
similarly proposed that the state of the immune system is structured
by inter-connected elements, where activation results from
perturbations of the stable linkages of the resting state (Pradeu and
Carosella 2006a, 2006b; Pradeu, Jaeger, and Vivier 2013). The original
“network” theory focused upon the inter-actions of the
immune system’s constituents, (Jerne 1974), while the
“continuity” theory employs an architecture of
antigenic-immune interactions (Pradeu 2012, 2018; Grossman and Paul
2015). When the immune system is regarded from this
“connected” perspective, tolerance is the result of a
stable continuity of interactions between an antigen and its
receptors. Thus, integrated states are quiescent and disrupted ones,
whether “foreign” or endogenous, generate immune
activation by breaking stabilized associations.
In addition to antigen/receptor dynamics, other factors are also
involved in delineating the scope of tolerable changes in the
organism. These include a self-regulated system of diverse
interactions among several immune components comprising a complex system of antigen-presenting cells, effector T and B lymphocytes, regulatory cells and a diverse soup of molecular signals
(Kim, Levy, and Lee 2009; Kidd et al. 2014). So, the functional
difference that determines recognition of the foreign results not only
from an aggregate of quantitative ligand-receptor affinity
differences, but also from the context in which the antigen is seen
and the degree of interruption in network dynamics induced by such an
immunogen (Cohen 2000a; Cohen and Efroni 2019). Accordingly, the
overall function of the immune system may be defined as maintenance of
molecular (antigenic) homeostasis (Poletaev, Stepanyuk, and Gershwin
2008). On this general view, a systems-wide collective
response—not the discriminatory power of individual lymphocytes
or their receptors—determines identity and immune
specificity.
4.1.3 Presentational cognition
The so-called “ecological” perspective offers still another
model of cognition, where the immune system does not employ
representations of the world, but rather “sees” the world
directly (Tauber 2017: 151–156, 219–228). In this
‘presentational’ schema, the capacity to extract
information about the environment depends on pre-programmed systems of
perception, whose organizational structures “resonate”
with environmental inputs (Gibson 1966; 1979). Accordingly, the
environment’s informational content results from the stimulation
of the system that already has the ability to acknowledge inputs of a
recognizable character. Simply, information is only that which is
already
meaningful (Ben-Ze’ev 1993: 70–71; Gibson
1979). This scheme would reconfigure the subject-object epistemology
dominating current immune theory with an information-processing
faculty that dispenses with some knowing entity, who sits in a
“Cartesian theater” to observe the world (Dennett
1991). Drawing an analogy from collective colony behaviors of insects
(Gordon 2001; Bonabeau 2001) and bacteria (Ben Jacob, Becker, Shapira,
and Levine 2004; Ben Jacob, Shapira, and Tauber 2005), the immune
system may then be modeled without centralized control or directives
by simply following its “rules” of regulation. Such a
model of “embedded” cognition holds that perception may be
explained independently of computational processes or representations
altogether (L. Shapiro 2011). Simply, presentational cognition
substitutes an agent, who employs representations, for a process in
which the immediacy of perception removes any such intermediary.
Accordingly, cognition is not
of
something, for perception is
entirely within the system itself; the agent has disappeared, and with
that vacancy, representations are discarded.
As with Jerne’s system, in presentational cognition, no
hierarchy exists, and no cognitive center is posited. The
stimulus–response model has been discarded and activation
heretofore understood as resulting from a predicate-structured
cognitive event now refers to increased dynamic activity that results
from the disruption of the network’s equilibrium. Immune
“knowledge” accordingly shifts from a
signifier–signified relationship to one in which meaning is
firmly lodged
within
the system itself, i.e., a system that “knows” only itself.
To the extent immunology would fashion itself along these lines, the
conception of the self partitioned from the world would be replaced by
an agent-free information-forming and information-processing faculty
(Orosz 2001; Forrest and Hofmeyr 2001). Such a distributed information
processing system has two key features:
There is no central immunological processor (as found in a
computer’s central processing unit). Immune specificity has
collective properties, and tolerance, as well as activation
distinctions are distributed and cannot be “reduced” to
isolated components (Coutinho 1989; Daëron 2014).
The dynamical patterns of interactions among the diverse parts of
the immune system function strictly in terms of their own processes in
the absence of a mediator or witness, and thereby dispense with the
traditional features of agency and accompanying autonomy that have
traditionally dominated immune theorizing.
Thus, paralleling current trends in other philosophical disciplines,
philosophy of immunology draws from, and contributes to, parallel
studies in the cognitive sciences that address the general problems of
agency, cognition, and behavior.
4.2 Reductionism versus holism in immunology
Apart from elucidating issues pertaining to identity, individuality
and agency of an organism in its broader ecological and evolutionary
history, philosophy of immunology also contributes to discussions
about the origin, organization, and methods of biological knowledge.
Reflecting on explanatory practices of immunology, the epistemic
modality has an important practical dimension that contributes to
developing methodological strategies and conceptual tools to handle
the complexity of the immune system. Genomic, proteomic and
transcriptomic studies are producing vast amounts of immune data with
little understanding of the basic organization and regulation that
must integrate systems-level and molecular-level approaches (Ohno
1990; Schatz and Langmead 2013; see the entry on
genomics and postgenomics
).
The shift from a focus on the insularity and autonomy of the organism
to its integration within a complex consortium of species carries a
contrasting holistic orientation to the reductivism characterizing the
molecularization of immunology (Ulvestad 2007: 65–67). The
theoretical implications and practical methodological re-direction
indicate a re-alignment of research strategies for immunology and,
more generally, an important contribution to the larger debates
concerning the character and feasibility of non-reductionist research
programs in the life sciences (Kitcher 1984; Sarkar 1998; Wimsatt
2007). Initially focused on the question of the relationship between
classical genetics and molecular biology, these debates have turned to
explanatory strategies in distinct biological subdisciplines, such as
neuroscience (Craver 2005), ecology (Dupré 1993), systems
biology (Wolkenhauer and Green 2013) and developmental biology (Love
2008; see the entry on
developmental biology
).
 Still awaiting broader recognition as an exemplar of explanatory
practices in life sciences, immunology already serves as a case study
to approach the problem of reduction and holism in biology and
medicine.
Different models of epistemic reduction have been considered with
little consensus about the applicability of this type of explanation
(Sarkar 1998). Dissatisfaction with models of theory reduction led to
various models of explanatory reduction that, unlike
deductive-nomological accounts, consider relationships between
epistemic units other than theories containing laws, while relying on
an intuitive sense of reduction as an explanation of higher level
features in terms of their parts (see the entry on
reductionism in biology
).
 A dominant concern about reduction is the so called
“many-many” relationships between levels of analysis,
where biological features are context dependent and may vary due to
heterogeneous lower level features (Hull 1974; Fodor 1974; S. Gilbert
and Sarkar 2000). One approach maintains that non-reductionist
explanations should focus on gross “cytological” features
of the studied phenomena rather than on lower level molecular
processes (Kitcher 1984). In contrast to this approach, immunologists
assume that reduction is an attempt to explain complex immune
phenomena in terms of
isolated
parts and interactions without
taking into consideration the entirety of structural and functional
complexities (Van Regenmortel 2002). Thus, instead of assuming that
non-reductionist explanations must ignore lower level molecular
details, holistic immunologists attempt to understand the multilevel
complexity of the immune phenomena they study (Rivas et al. 2017).
Accordingly, non-reductionist descriptions do not attempt to remain on
a descriptive, biological level of understanding, but rather adapt
pluralistic approaches that integrate distinct dimensions and frames
of reference, i.e., both molecular and higher orders of analysis. This
perspective aligns with recent approaches in philosophy of biology
that move beyond the division of lower- and higher-level explanatory
strategies and highlight the importance of interdisciplinary
integration exhibited by current scientific practice (Brigandt 2010;
Love and Lugar 2013).
Both reductive and holistic immunological research agendas have vied
for dominance (Silverstein 2009: 25–42). The immune-chemical
program, championed by Ehrlich and other immunochemists of the first
half of the twentieth century, examined immune reactions in terms of
chemical and physical forces between immune receptors and their
ligands (Silverstein 2009: 456). These immunochemists were adopting a
“unifactoralism” strategy that endeavors to explain
complex biological processes in terms of single factors (Powell and
Dupré 2008). That program was modified and renewed by the
elucidation of the genetics of antibody diversification, a series of
discoveries that placed immunology well within the molecular biology
revolution (Podolsky and Tauber 1997).
Studies of immunity coupled to developmental biology, ecology, and
evolutionary biology have balanced the molecularization of immunology
with an organism-based orientation. Early advocates of such
approaches, like Metchnikoff, described immunity in terms of cells and
cellular interactions, a “biological” perspective extended
by Burnet, who eclectically endeavored to include underlying molecular
processes (Crist and Tauber 2000; Baxter 2006: 38). He presented
immunity in terms of adaptation, selection, and population-level cell
behavior, rather than solely in terms of chemical and physical
molecular reactions. As already discussed, this broadened perspective
introduced the ‘self’ into the immune lexicon and brought
new figurative language associated with agency and a host of meanings
borrowed from other human experience. And, complementing these
holistic explanatory and narrative strategies, he also postulated the
existence of molecular signatures of self and considered lymphocyte
receptors as independent decision-makers mediating immune reactions
based on their physical fit with cognate antigens (Burnet 1969). Thus,
by representing cases of theoretical integration and explanatory
heterogeneity, epistemic strategies adopted by Burnet and other
organism-oriented immunologists fit into the inclusion of of plurality
and unification increasingly regarded as necessary to capture the
complexity of immune functions (cf. Dupré 1993; Mitchell 2003;
Plutynski 2013).
More recently, attempts to integrate molecular biology with systems
analysis challenge the apparent conflict between reductionist and
holist strategies (Green et al. 2017; Mazzocchi 2012). After all,
attempts to explain complex immunological phenomena in terms of
isolated parts and interactions without taking into consideration the
entirety of structural and functional complexity that these phenomena
exhibit have been ineffective. For example, vaccine development
studies, when limited to investigation of the structural correlates of
antigen-antibody interaction without deeper understanding of the
dynamic features of a host-pathogen encounter, often prove
unsuccessful (Van Regenmortel 2002). So, instead of assuming that
non-reductionist explanations must ignore lower level molecular
details, system-oriented immunologists attempt to understand the
multilevel complexity of the immune reactions they study (Rivas et al.
2017). Dynamical systems theory and a variety of network-based
approaches are used in systems biology to integrate distinct levels of
analysis and elucidate the complexity of the biological phenomena in question
(Green et al. 2017). Accordingly, a pluralistic approach that attends
to distinct dimensions and frames of reference, i.e., both molecular
and higher orders of analysis, has directed recent efforts to
integrate the complexity immunity (Löwy 2008: 172; see entry on
philosophy of systems and synthetic biology
).
 However, the program of melding the reductionist and holistic methods
as complementary to each other has been slowed by both technical and
conceptual hurdles (Fang and Casadevall 2011). How to model the system
as a
system
requires the collection of information about the
totality of interactions to explain causal mechanisms with multiple
inputs and stochastic outcomes. No approach has achieved dominance
and, consequently, the question of how massive data might be
incorporated into a systems-wide comprehensive model comprises a key
challenge of contemporary immunology.
5. Immunology’s Social Dimensions
Anti-foreign imagery in immunology provides an excellent case study of
bidirectional links between science and society (Tauber 1994, 2016;
Howes 1999). The wide acceptance of the self-nonself discrimination
model derived from the paradigmatic host-pathogen struggle that
exemplified the nineteenth century conceptualization of the body as
isolated from the environment. As developed by Claude Bernard, this
insular construct provided biology a theoretical foundation for
organismal biology that complemented Malthusian economics, liberal
political philosophy, and Comtian sociology to instantiate the
autonomous body as a political, social, economic and medical entity
(Foucault 1963 [1973]; Agamben 1998). Notwithstanding that
“independence” is a political term, Bernard’s notion
of autonomy fails to fairly represent the dialectical relationships of
the organism and its environment (Levins and Lewontin 1985), nor the
evolutionary peculiarities of individuality itself (Buss 1987).
The depiction of the immune self as disconnecting the organism from
its surroundings harmonized with a particular Western cultural
experience of seeing “ourselves as entities, separate from the
rest of the world—as containers with insides and outsides”
(Lakoff and Johnson 1980: 58; Fleck 1935 [1979: 174–175]).
However, this extrapolation of a particular Western notion of
subjectivity may well be regarded a social construct (Mead 1962)
inasmuch as cross-cultural analysis reveals how the ancient Chinese
sensed self more like a fluid interface than as an enclosed entity
(Geaney 2011). And contemporary anthropological studies re-confirm how
notions of selfhood vary between cultures (e.g., Roland 1988). From
this perspective, social connotations and subjective experiences go
hand in hand with creating meaningful images of immunity and
biological identity. Finding its fertile soil in the fifties, the idea
of the demarcated organism squarely fit the valorization of
individualism that had diffused into Western arts, politics and
science during this period (Barbour 1995). An insular understanding of
“the self” at the core of these atomistic
characterizations lies at the foundation of immune theory and
practice, where contemporary psychological and philosophical
constructions of identity based on autonomous individuality prevail
(Tauber 1994).
However, culture critics have seized on immunology’s notions of
autonomy as exemplifying modern notions of identity, where boundaries
are contested, and the body becomes the localized site of battle
between self and other (Sontag 1990; Haraway 1989; E. Martin 1994).
These commentators cite the recognized permeability of living
creatures, their symbiotic exchanges, and tolerance of myriad
assimilated foreign materials to challenge the origin and cultural
resonance of the atomistic framework. David Napier has characterized
our “age of immunology” as an individualism marked by a
preoccupation with the self and by an absence of transforming efforts
to incorporate the foreign (Napier 2003). Active rejection enunciated
with warfare metaphors so prevalent in immunology’s
lexicon—“attack”, “defense”,
“invaders”—dramatically illustrate this formulation,
both in terms of the self/other dichotomy, as well as the privileged
regard of individuality over community. On this view, the
“immune self” appears as a metaphor to model Western
culture, by invoking “immunization” as an explanatory
model for understanding the core dynamics of post-industrial societies
(Esposito 2011; Sloterdijk 2011). The metaphor’s wide
application—from religion and metaphysics to housing and
cities—invokes the dialectics of borders and exchange,
individuality and communes, where the balance of intrusion and defense
is invoked to characterize the “bubble” in which humans
live. Note, these interpretations closely resonate with the dynamics
of immunity regarded ecologically, as discussed above.
These contrasting applications of social descriptions to immunology
reveal the ease by which the science may be employed for culture
criticism. But the exchange need not end with such contributions.
Having been implemented in the discourse of science, the imagery
borrowed from the culture-at-large becomes transformed and then
returns to the social domain, impacting on portrayals of persons and
their relationship with others (E. Martin 1994). On this view, the
science-culture exchange broadens the implications of understanding
the development of immune theory. For example, the political resonance
of the self/nonself framework was evident in the context of a debate
on tissue incompatibility, whose depiction as innate and unchangeable
harmonized with Burnet and Medawar’s elitist sympathies and
opposition towards social Lamarckism (Lafferty 1995). The vision of
personhood that stood behind the self/nonself discrimination concept,
can be further traced back to Burnet’s self-confessed
“harmless terror of strangers” and his
Darwinist vision of human relationships as defined by primordial
selfishness and incessant drives towards domination and power (Burnet
1971: 12). Along with ongoing cultural and political transformations, our
understanding of immune identity has also changed in the transition
from a modernist vision of delineated selfhood towards a more complex view
that dispenses with the self altogether. Thus, the imagery that is
used to represent the activity of the immune system has deep roots in
the broader culture that reflect dominant values and tensions defining the dialectics of the individual and her society. In sum, while immunology provides metaphors for characterizing human societies, the science in turn, draws from its supporting culture to model its
biology. Here we see an explicit demonstration of the
bi-directionality of social and scientific discourses, and to draw the
line separating the laboratory from its supporting culture again
proves problematic (Gieryn 1995).
6. Conclusion
Two conceptual shifts that have marked contemporary research in
immunology have influenced philosophical comment on various topics in
biology. The first is a major revision in how the mechanics of
immunity are conceived. Taking account of the context in which the
immune reaction is regulated, the earlier conception of immune
specificity as arising from some simple mechanical lock and key
matching between selected antibodies binding to noxious antigens has
been replaced with collectivist models of molecular interactions. In
accounting for the frequency and intensity of an immune encounter,
this dynamic orientation portrays the immune system as a sensor of
change rather than structure. The sensitivity of such a
cognitive system that must mediate multifarious immune reactions
requires a co-ordination of
collective
molecular ensembles,
in which diverse elements together determine the extent of the immune
response (Daëron 2014). Indeed, only through modulated responses
can immunity fulfill its diverse functions, some of which require
tolerance of recognized substances and others full blown activation of
rejection. Accordingly, immune theory has departed from the classical,
self/nonself framework that depicts the immune response as a simple
“on” and “off” binary switch, to multifaceted
models that account for a spectrum of reactivities.
The second conceptual shift addresses how immunity mediates the
interactions of the organism with its environment. That ecological
orientation has inflected immunology from its earlier insular
conceptions of the organism to a dynamic interactive view that
highlights how life experience alters the immune response to external
challenges and opportunities. With this broadened perspective, the
idea of
immunity
extends beyond defense of an atomistic
individual, to include the mediation of the organism’s
ecological economy, both defensive and assimilative. This includes the
internal environment as well, inasmuch as the microbiome, established
through immune niche formation, has increasingly focused attention on
the prevalence of immune tolerance, symbiosis, and the biology
characterized by cooperative relationships of various sorts (Eberl
2010; Bilate and LaFaille 2012).
In short, the philosophical challenge of defining immune identity is
framed by differing orientations, namely, autonomous individuality
versus collective ensemble (both applicable to the regulation of the
immune response and contextual placement in the environment). Which
version chosen then leads to strikingly different answers to
immunology’s key questions:
What is immunity;
what are the defining characteristics of individuality as
determined immunologically;
what are the epistemological standing of immune selfhood and the
rhetorical uses of agency in its various forms (literal, metaphoric,
and idiomatic);
how has the cognitive paradigm framed immune processes as an
information processing system; and
how might biological causation of the immune system studied as a
whole be modeled?
Each of these issues directly pertains to philosophical considerations
about the character of the organism, the relationships of parts to the
whole, principles of biological organization and regulation, the
construction of cognitive schemas, and the ability of models to
capture complex organic functions.
In conclusion, although firmly embedded in philosophy of biology and
engaging in closely related concerns, the philosophy of immunology has
become an established discipline with distinctive interests and
contributions. The immunological matters of interest to philosophers
do not always overlap with those that dominate immunology’s
contemporary research program. This divergence highlights how
philosophy of immunology has emerged as an autonomous field with its
own subjects of attention and methods of inquiry that complement
rather than mimic or replicate the pursuits in related areas of
theoretical and experimental immunology. Moreover, philosophical
studies of immunology have contributed to a wide range of pivotal
topics engaged by philosophers of biology—organismal identity;
individuality; dynamic causation in complex systems (integrating
complexity theory with big data studies); the characterization of the
goals and methods of systems biology; the organization of information;
the characterization of the normative and deviant; and personal
ontology (self). Each of these areas of research impact other
biological disciplines of interest to philosophers, i.e., development,
ecology, genetics, evolution and cognition. And beyond the purview of
philosophy of biology, studies of immunology contribute to the more
general discussions of reductionism/anti-reductionism, theory change
and conceptual modeling, and social and cultural studies of science
(i.e., the function of metaphors in science, the role of a scientific
discourse). In sum, a rich two-way traffic between philosophers of
immunology and philosophers of science has emerged that allows the
former to use tried-and-tested conceptual tools developed by their
colleagues, while providing a unique outlook for the latter. Given the
centrality of immunology in modern biology and the unique perspective
offered by this science on crucial philosophical problems, further
engagement not only seems likely, but an imperative for philosophy of
science writ large.
Bibliography
Ader, Robert (ed.), 2006,
Psychoneuroimmunology
, 4th
edition, Burlington, MA: Elsevier Academic Press.
Agamben, Giorgio, 1998,
Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare
Life
, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Anderson, Warwick, 2004, “Natural Histories Of Infectious
Disease: Ecological Vision In Twentieth-Century Biomedical
Science”,
Osiris
, 19: 39–61.
doi:10.1086/649393
–––, 2014, “Getting ahead of one’s
self? The common culture of immunology and philosophy”,
Isis
, 105(3): 606–616. doi:10.1086/678176
Anderson, Warwick and Ian R. Mackay, 2014, “Fashioning the
Immunological Self: The Biological Individuality of F. Macfarlane
Burnet”,
Journal of the History of Biology
, 47(1):
147–75. doi:10.1007/s10739-013-9352-1
Aristotle,
Categories
, translated with notes by
J.L. Ackrill, in
>Aristotle’s Categories and De
Interpretatione
, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963.
Aristotle,
Metaphysics
, translated by W.D. Ross,
in
Aristotle’s Metaphysics
, Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1924.
Baetu, Tudor M., 2014, “Models and the Mosaic of Scientific
Knowledge: The Case of Immunology”,
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Sciences. Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 45: 49–56.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2013.11.003
Barbour, Michael G., 1995, “Ecological Fragmentation in the
Fifties”, in
Uncommon Ground. Toward Reinventing
Nature
, William Cronon (ed.), New York: Norton, pp.
233–255.
Baxter, Alan G., 2006, “Self/Nonself Recognition”, In
Autoantibodies and Autoimmunity: Molecular Mechanisms in Health
and Disease
, K. Michael Pollard (ed.), Weinheim: Wiley-VCH, pp.
37–61.
Ben-Ze’ev, Aaron, 1993,
The Perceptual System: A
Philosophical and Psychological Perspective
, New York: Lang.
Bekoff, Marc, Collin Allen, and Gordon M. Burghardt, 2002,
The
Cognitive Animal: Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives on Animal
Cognition
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ben Jacob, Eshel, Israela Becker, Yoash Shapira, and Herbert
Levine, 2004, “Bacterial Linguistic Communication and Social
Intelligence”,
Trends in Microbiology
, 12(8):
366–372. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2004.06.006
Ben Jacob, Eshel, Donald S. Coffey, and Herbert Levine, 2012,
“Bacterial Survival Strategies Suggest Rethinking Cancer
Cooperativity”,
Trends in Microbiology
, 20(9):
403–10. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2012.06.001
Ben Jacob, Eshel, Yoash Shapira, and Alfred I. Tauber, 2005,
“Seeking the Foundations of Cognition in Bacteria: from
Schrödinger’s Negative Entropy to Functional
Information”,
Physica A
, 359: 495–524.
doi:10.1016/j.physa.2005.05.096
Bilate, Angelina M. and Juan J. LaFaille, 2012, “Induced
CD4+Fox3+ Regulatory T Cells in Immune Tolerance”,
Annual
Review of Immunology
, 30: 733–58.
doi:10.1146/annurev-immunol-020711-075043
Bokulich N.A., J. Chung, T. Battaglia, N. Henderson, M. Jay, H.Li,
A.D. Lieber, F. Wu, G.I. Perez-Perez, Y. Chen, W. Schweizer, X. Zheng,
M. Contreras, M.G. Dominguez-Bello, and M.J. Blaser, 2016,
“Antibiotics, Birth Mode, and Diet Shape Microbiome Maturation
During Early Life”,
Science Translational Medicine
,
8(343): 343ra82. doi:10.1126/scitranslmed.aad7121
Bonabeau, Eric, 2001, “Control Mechanisms for Distributed
Autonomous Systems: Insights from the Social Insects”, in Segel
and Cohen 2001: 281–292.
Brigandt, Ingo, 2010, “Beyond Reduction and Pluralism:
Toward an Epistemology of Explanatory Integration in Biology”,
Erkenntnis
, 73(3): 295–311.
doi:10.1007/s10670-010-9233-3
Burnet, Frank Macfarlane, 1957, “A Modification of
Jerne’s Theory of Antibody Production using the Concept of
Clonal Selection”,
The Australian Journal of Science
,
20(3): 67–69.
–––, 1959,
The Clonal Selection Theory of
Acquired Immunity
, Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University
Press.
–––, 1965, “The Darwinian Approach to
Immunity”, in
Molecular and Cellular Basis of Antibody
Formation
, Jaroslav Šterzl (ed.), New York: Academic
Press, pp. 17–20.
–––, 1969,
Self and Not-Self. Cellular
Immunology Book I
, Melbourne: Melbourne University Press.
–––, 1971,
Dominant Mammal. The Biology of
Human Destiny
, Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books.
Burnet, Frank Macfarlane and Frank Fenner, 1949,
The
Production of Antibodies
, 2
nd
ed., Melbourne:
Macmillan and Company.
Burnet, Frank Macfarlane and David O. White, 1972,
Natural
History of Infectious Disease
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Burzyn, Dalia, Christophe Benoist and Diane Mathis, 2013,
“Regulatory T Cells in Nonlymphoid Tissues”,
Nature
Immunology
, 14(10): 1007–1013. doi:10.1038/ni.2683
Buss, Leo, 1987,
The Evolution of Individuality
,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Casadevall, Arturo and Liise-anne Pirofski, 2015, “What is a
Host? Incorporating the Microbiota into the Damage-Response
Framework”,
Infection and Immunit
y, 83(1): 2–7.
doi:10.1128/IAI.02627-14.
Casadevall, Arturo, Ferric C. Fang, and Liise-anne Pirofski, 2011,
“Microbial Virulence as an Emergent Property: Consequences and
Opportunities”,
PLoS Pathogens
, 7(7): e1002136.
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002136
Chiu, Lynn and Scott F. Gilbert, 2015, “The Birth of the
Holobiont: Multi-species Birthing Through Mutual Scaffolding and Niche
Construction”,
Biosemiotics
, 8(2): 191–210.
doi:10.1007/s12304-015-9232-5
Churchland, Paul M., 1989,
A Neurocomputational Perspective,
The Nature of Mind and the Structure of Science
, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Clarke, Ellen, 2010, “The Problem of Biological
Individuality”,
Biological Theory
, 5: 312–325.
doi:10.1162/BIOT_a_00068
Cohen, Irun R., 1992a, “The Cognitive Principle Challenges
Clonal Selection”,
Immunology Today
, 13(1):
441–444. doi:10.1016/0167-5699(92)90071-E
–––, 1992b, “The Cognitive Paradigm and
the Immunological Homunculus”,
Immunology Today
,
13(12): 490–494. doi:10.1016/0167-5699(92)90024-2
–––, 2000,
Tending Adam’s Garden:
Evolving the Cognitive Immune Self
, New York: Academic
Press.
–––, 2007a, “Biomarkers, Self-antigens,
and the Immunological Homunculus”,
Journal of
Autoimmunity
, 29(4): 246–9.
doi:10.1016/j.jaut.2007.07.016
–––, 2007b, “Real and Artificial Immune
Systems: Computing the State of the Body”,
Nature Reviews
Immunology
, 7(7): 569–74. doi:10.1038/nri2102
Cohen, Irun R. and Sol Efroni, 2019, “The immune System
Computes the State of the Body: Crowd Wisdom, Machine Learning, and
Immune Cell Reference Repertoires Help Manage Inflammation”,
Frontiers in Immunology
, 10: 10.
doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.00010
Cohn, Melvin, 2015, “Autoimmunity: Rationalizing Possible
Pathways from Initiation to Disease”,
Journal of Theoretical
Biology
, 375: 40–51. doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.05.030
Coutinho, Antonio, 1989, “Beyond Clonal Selection and
Network”,
Immunological Reviews
, 110: 63–88.
doi:10.1111/j.1600-065X.1989.tb00027.x
–––, 2003, “A Walk with Francisco Varela
from First- to Second-generation Networks: In Search of the Structure,
Dynamics and Metadynamics of An Organism-centered Immune
System”,
Biological Research
, 36(1): 17–26.
doi:10.4067/S0716-97602003000100004
Craver, Carl F., 2005, “Beyond Reduction: Mechanisms,
Multifield Integration and the Unity of Neuroscience”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 36(2): 373–395.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2005.03.008
Crist, Eileen and Alfred I. Tauber, 2000, “Selfhood,
Immunity, and the Biological Imagination: The Thought of Frank
Macfarlane Burnet”,
Biology & Philosophy
, 15(4):
509–533. doi:10.1023/A:1006657124783
Daëron, Marc, 2014, “Fc Receptors as Adaptive
Immunoreceptors”, in
Fc Receptors
, Marc Daeron and Falk
Nimmerjahn (eds.), (Current Topics in Microbiology and Immunology
382), Cham: Springer International Publishing, 131–164.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-07911-0_7
Darden, Lindley and Joseph A. Cain, 1989, “Selection Type
Theories”,
Philosophy of Science
, 56(1): 106–129.
doi:10.1086/289475
Davies, Luke C., Stephen J. Jenkins, Judith E. Allen, and Philip
R. Taylor, 2013, “Tissue-Resident Macrophages”,
Nature
Immunology
, 14(10): 986–995. doi:10.1038/ni.2705
Davis, Daniel M., 2014,
The Compatibility Gene
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Dennett, Daniel C., 1987,
The Intentional Stance
,
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
–––, 1991,
Consciousness Explained
,
Boston: Little Brown.
Depew, David J. and Bruce H. Weber, 1996,
Darwinism Evolving:
Systems Dynamics and the Genealogy of Natural Selection
,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Derecki N.C., A.N. Cardani, C.H. Yang, K.M. Quinnies, A.
Crihfield, K.R. Lynch, and J. Kipnis, 2010, “Regulation of
Learning and Memory by Meningeal Immunity: a Key Role for IL-4”,
The Journal of Experimental Medicine
, 207(5):
1067–1080. doi:10.1084/jem.20091419
Derrida, Jacques, 2003, “Autoimmunity: Real and Symbolic
Suicides” in
Philosophy in a Time of Terror: Dialogues with
Jurgen Habermas and Jacques Derrida
, Borradori Giovanna (ed.),
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, pp. 85–136.
Dobzhansky, Theodosius, 1970,
Genetics of the Evolutionary
Process
, New York and London: Columbia University Press.
Dumouchel, Paul, 1996, “Natural Selection and Selection Type
Theories”, in
in Québec Studies in the Philosophy of
Science
, Mathieu Marion and Robert S. Cohen (eds.), (Boston
Studies in the Philosophy of Science 178), Dordrecht: Springer
Netherlands, 13–24. doi:10.1007/978-94-009-0113-1_2
Dupré, John, 1993,
The Disorder of Things: Metaphysical
Foundations of the Disunity of Science
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
–––, 2014, “Animalism and the Persistence
of Human Organisms”,
The Southern Journal of
Philosophy
, Spindel Supplement, 52: 6–23.
doi:10.1111/sjp.12065
–––, 2017, “Metaphysics of
Metamorphosis”,
Aeon
, URL =
 <
https://aeon.co/essays/science-and-metaphysics-must-work-together-to-answer-lifes-deepest-questions
>
Eberl, Gérard, 2010, “A New Vision of Immunity:
Homeostasis of the Superorganism”,
Mucosal Immunology
,
3: 450–460. doi:10.1038/mi.2010.20
–––, 2016, “Immunity by
Equilibrium”,
Nature Reviews Immunology
, 16(8):
524–532. doi:10.1038/nri.2016.75
Edelman, Gerald M., 1974, “The Problem of Molecular
Recognition by a Selective System”, in
Studies in the
Philosophy of Biology
, Francisco Jose Ayala and Theodosius
Dobzhansky (eds), London: Palgrave, pp. 45–56.
–––, 1987,
Natural Darwinism: The Theory of
Neuronal Group Selection
, New York: Basic Books.
Eichmann, Klaus, 2008,
The Network Collective: Rise and Fall
of a Scientific Paradigm
, Basel, Switzerland:
Birkhäuser.
Erlebacher, Adrian, 2013, “Immunology of the Maternal-Fetal
Interface”,
Annual Review of Immunology
, 31(1):
387–411. doi:10.1146/annurev-immunol-032712-100003
Esposito, Roberto, 2011,
Immunitas. The Protection and
Negation of Life
, Cambridge: Polity.
Fagan, Melinda Bonnie, 2007, “The Search for the
Hematopoietic Stem Cell: Social Interaction and Epistemic Success in
Immunology”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 38(1): 217–237.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2006.12.010
–––, 2009, “Fleck and the Social
Constitution of Scientific Objectivity”,
Studies in History
and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 40(4): 272–225.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2009.09.005
Fang, Ferric C. and Arturo Casadevall, 2011, “Reductionistic
and Holistic Science”,
Infection and Immunity
, 79(4):
1401–1404. doi:10.1128/IAI.01343-10
Filiano A.J., Y. Xu, N.J. Tustison, R.L. Marsh, W. Baker, I.
Smirnov, C.C. Overall, S.P. Gadani, S.D. Turner, Z. Weng, S.N.
Peerzade, H. Chen, K.S. Lee, M.M. Scott, M.P. Beenhakker, V. Litvak,
and J. Kipnis, 2016, “Unexpected Role of Interferon-γ in
Regulating Neuronal Connectivity and Social Behaviour”,
Nature
, 535(7612): 425–429.
doi:10.1038/nature18626
Fleck, Ludwik, 1935 [1979],
Entstehung und Entwicklung einer
wissenschaftlichen Tatsache
, Basel: Schwabe. Translated as
Genesis and Development of a Scientific Fact
, Frederick
Bradley and Thaddeus J. Trenn (trans), Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
Fodor, Jerry A., 1974, “Special Sciences (or: The Disunity
of Science as a Working Hypothesis)”,
Synthese
, 28(2):
97–115. doi:10.1007/BF00485230
Forbes, Stuart J. and Nadia Rosenthal, 2014, “Preparing the
Ground for Tissue Regeneration: From Mechanism to Therapy”,
Nature Medicine
, 20(8): 857–869.
doi:10.1038/nm.3653
Forrest, Stephanie and Steven A. Hofmeyr, 2001, “Immunology
as Information Processing”, in Segel and Cohen 2001:
361–387.
Foucault, Michel, 1963 [1973],
Naissance de la clinique: une
archéologie du regard médical
, Paris : Presses
Universitaires de France. Translated as
The Birth of the Clinic:
An Archaeology of Medical Perception
, A. M. Sheridan Smith
(trans.), New York: Vintage, 1973.
Fox Keller, Evelyn, 2002,
Making Sense of Life. Explaining
Biological Development with Models, Metaphors and Machines
,
Cambridge, MA; Harvard University Press.
Fridman, Wolf-H., 1991,
Le Cerveau Mobile
, Paris:
Hermann.
Geaney, Jane, 2011, “Self as Container? Metaphors We Lose by
in Understanding Early Chinese Texts”,
Antiqvorm
Philosophia: An International Journal
, 5: 11–30.
Gibson, James J., 1966,
The Senses Considered as Perceptual
Systems
, Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
–––, 1979,
The Ecological Approach to Visual
Perception
, Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Gieryn, Thomas F., 1995, “Boundaries of Science”, in
Handbook of Science and Technology Studies
, Sheila Jasanoff,
Gerald E. Markle, James C. Peterson, and Trevor Pinch (eds), Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage, pp. 393–443.
Gilbert, Charles D., 2013, “Intermediate-level Visual
Processing and Visual Primitives”, in
Principles of
Neuroscience
, fifth edition, Eric R. Kandel, James H. Schwartz,
Thomas M. Jessell, Steven A. Siegelbaum, A. J. Hudspeth (eds), New
York: McGraw-Hill Professional, pp. 602–620.
Gilbert, Scott F. and David Epel, 2015,
Ecological
Developmental Biology: The Environmental Regulation of Development,
Health, and Evolution
, Sunderland, MA: Sinauer Associates.
Gilbert, Scott F., Jan Sapp, and Alfred I. Tauber, 2012, “A
Symbiotic View of Life: We Have Never Been Individuals”,
Quarterly Review of Biology
, 87(4): 325–341.
doi:10.1086/668166
Gilbert, Scott F. and Sahotra Sarkar, 2000, “Embracing
Complexity: Organicism for the 21st Century”,
Developmental
Dynamics
, 219(1): 1–9.
Gissis, Snait B. and Eva Jablonka (eds), 2011,
Transformations
of Lamarckism: From Subtle Fluids to Molecular Biology
,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Godfrey-Smith, Peter, 2009,
Darwinian Populations and Natural
Selection
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gomez de Agüero M., S.C. Ganal-Vonarburg, T. Fuhrer, S. Rupp,
Y. Uchimura, H. Li, A. Steinert, M. Heikenwalder, S. Hapfelmeier, U.
Sauer, K.D. McCoy, A.J. Macpherson, 2016, “The Maternal
Microbiota Drives Early Postnatal Innate Immune Development”,
Science
, 351(6279): 1296–1302.
doi:10.1126/science.aad2571
Gordon, Deborah M., 2001, “Task Allocation in Ant
Colonies”, in Segel and Cohen 2001: 293–301.
Gould Stephen J. and Elisabeth A. Lloyd, 1999,
“Individuality and Adaptation Across Levels of Selection: How
Shall we Name and Generalize the Unit of Darwinism?”,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science (USA)
, 96(21):
11904–11909. doi:10.1073/pnas.96.21.11904
Green, S., M. Şerban, R. Scholl, N. Jones, I. Brigandt, and
W. Bechtel, 2017, “Network Analyses in Systems Biology: New
Strategies for Dealing with Biological Complexity”,
Synthese
, 195(4), 1751–1777.
doi:10.1007/s11229-016-1307-6
Griffith O.W., Chavan A.R., Protopapas S., Maziarz J., Romero R.,
and Wagner G.P., 2017, “Embryo Implantation Evolved from an
Ancestral Inflammatory Attachment Reaction”,
Proceedings of
the National Academy of Science (USA)
, 114(32):
E6566–E6575. doi:10.1073/pnas.1701129114
Grignolio, Andrea, Michele Mishto, Ana Maria Caetano Faria, Paolo
Garagnani, Claudio Franceschi, and Paolo Tieri, 2014, “Towards a
Liquid Self: How Time, Geography, and Life Experiences Reshape the
Biological Identity”,
Frontiers in Immunology
, 5: 153.
doi:10.3389/fimmu.2014.00153
Grossman, Zvi, 2019, “Immunological Paradigms, Mechanisms,
and Models: Conceptual Understanding Is a Prerequisite to Effective
Modeling”,
Frontiers in Immunology
, 10: 2522.
doi:10.3389/fimmu.2019.02522
Grossman, Zvi and William E Paul, 1992, “Adaptive Cellular
Interactions in the Immune System: The Tunable Activation Threshold
and the Significance of Subthreshold Responses”,
Proceedings
of the National Academy of Science (USA)
, 89(21):
10365–10369. doi:10.1073/pnas.89.21.10365
–––, 2015, “Dynamic Tuning of Lymphocytes:
Physiological Basis, Mechanisms, and Function”,
Annual
Review of Immunology
, 33: 677–713.
doi:10.1146/annurev-immunol-032712-100027
Guay, Alexandre and Thomas Pradeu, 2016, “To Be Continued:
The Genidentity of Physical and Biological Processes”, in
Individuals Across the Sciences
, Alexandre Guay and Thomas
Pradeu (eds), New York: Oxford University Press, pp.
317–347.
Haraway, Donna, 1989, “The Biopolitics of Postmodern Bodies:
Determinations of Self in Immune System Discourse”,
Differences
, 1: 3–43.
Hershberg Uri and Sol Efroni, 2001, “The Immune System and
Other Cognitive Systems”,
Complexity
6(5): 14–21.
doi:10.1002/cplx.1046
Hesse, Mary B., 1966,
Models and Analogies in Science
,
Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
Hoffman, Steven A., 2012, “The Immunological Self”,
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
, 55(3): 350–361.
doi:10.1353/pbm.2012.0029
Horvath, Philippe and Rodolphe Barrangou, 2010, “CRISPR/Cas,
the Immune System of Bacteria and Archaea”,
Science
,
327(5962): 167–170. doi:10.1126/science.1179555
Howes, Moira, 1998, “The Self of Philosophy and the Self of
Immunology”,
Perspectives in Biology and Medicine
,
42(1): 118–130. doi:10.1353/pbm.1998.0046
–––, 1999,
Immunology and the Indiscrete
Self
, Phd Dissertation, The University of Western Ontario
(Canada).
–––, 2000, “Self, Intentionality, and
Immunological Explanation”,
Seminars in Immunology
,
12(3): 249–256. doi:10.1006/smim.2000.0238
–––, 2007, “Maternal Agency and the
Immunological Paradox of Pregnancy”, in Harodl Kincaid and
Jennifer McKitrick (eds),
Establishing Medical Reality: Essays in
the Metaphysics and Epistemology of Biomedical Science
,
Dordrecht: Springer, pp. 179–198.
doi:10.1007/1-4020-5216-2_13
–––, 2008. “Conceptualizing the
Maternal-Fetal Relationship in Reproductive Immunology”, in
Kroker, Keelan, and Mazumdar 2008: 247–271.
–––, 2010, “Self and Nonself”, in
Sarkar and Plutynski 2010: 271–286.
Hughes, David T. and Vanessa Sperandio, 2008, “Inter-Kingdom
Signalling: Communication Between Bacteria and Their Hosts”,
Nature Reviews Microbiology
, 6(2): 111–120.
doi:10.1038/nrmicro1836
Hull, David L., 1974,
Philosophy of Biological Science
,
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
–––, 1978, “A Matter of
Individuality”,
Philosophy of Science
, 45(3):
335–360. doi:10.1086/288811
–––, 1992, “Individual”, in
Keywords in Evolutionary Biology
, Evelyn F. Keller and
Elisabeth A. Lloyd (eds), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp.
180–187.
Hull, David L., Rodney E. Langman, and Sigrid S. Glenn, 2001,
“A General Account of Selection: Biology, Immunology, and
Behavior”,
Behavioral and Brain Sciences
, 24(3):
511–528. doi:10.1017/S0140525X01004162
Hull, David L. and Michael Ruse (eds), 2007,
The Cambridge
Companion to the Philosophy of Biology
, New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Huss, John, 2014, “Methodology and Ontology in Microbiome
Research”,
Biological Theory
, 9(4): 392–400.
doi:10.1007/s13752-014-0187-6
Jablonka, Eva, 2019, “Lamarckian Realities: The CRISPR-Cas
System and Beyond”,
Biology and Philosophy
, 34(1).
doi:10.1007/s10539-018-9660-0
Jablonka, Eva and Marion J. Lamb, 2014,
Evolution in Four
Dimensions: Genetic, Epigenetic, Behavioral, and Symbolic Variation in
the History of Life
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jerne, Niels K., 1966, “The Natural Selection Theory of
Antibody Formation: Ten Years Later”, in
Phage and the
Origins of Molecular Biology
, John Cairns, Gunther S. Stent, and
James D. Watson (eds), New York: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press,
pp. 301–312.
–––, 1974, “Towards a Network Theory of
the Immune System”,
Annals of Institute
Pasteur/Immunology
, (Paris) 125C: 373–389.
–––, 1985, “The Generative Grammar of the
Immune System”,
EMBO Journal
, 4(4): 847–852.
Karasov, William H., Carlos Martínez del Rio, and Enrique
Caviedes-Vidal, 2011, “Ecological Physiology of Diet and
Digestive Systems”,
Annual Review of Physiology
, 73:
69–93. doi:10.1146/annurev-physiol-012110-142152
Kaufman, Dan, 2016, “Locke’s Theory of
Identity”, in
A Companion to Locke
, Matthew Stuart
(ed.), Chichester, West Sussex, UK: Wiley-Blackwell, pp.
236–259.
Kidd, Brian A., Lauren A. Peters, Eric E. Schadt, and Joel T.
Dudley, 2014, “Unifying Immunology with Informatics and
Multiscale Biology”,
Nature Immunology
, 15(2):
118–127. doi:10.1038/ni.2787
Kim, Peter S., Doron Levy, and Peter P. Lee, 2009, “Modeling
and Simulation of the Immune System as a Self-regulating
Network”,
Methods in Enzymology
, 467: 79–109.
doi:10.1016/S0076-6879(09)67004-X
Kitano, Hiroaki, 2001, “Systems Biology: Toward System-Level
Understanding of Biological Systems”, in
Foundations of

Systems Biology
, Hiroaki Kitano (ed.), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
pp. 1–36.
Kitcher, Philip, 1984, “1953 and All That. A Tale of Two
Sciences”,
The Philosophical Review
, 93(3):
335–373. doi:10.2307/2184541
Koonin, Eugene V., 2012,
The Logic of Chance: The Nature and
Origin of Biological Evolution
, Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT Press
Science Series.
–––, 2019, “CRISPR: A New Principle of
Genome Engineering Linked to Conceptual Shifts in Evolutionary
Biology”,
Biology and Philosophy
, 34(1).
doi:10.1007/s10539-018-9658-7
Koonin, Eugene V. and Yuri I. Wolf, 2016, “Just how
Lamarckian is CRISPR-Cas Immunity: The Continuum of Evolvability
Mechanisms”,
Biology Direct
, 11(1): 9.
doi:10.1186/s13062-016-0111-z
Kroker, Kenton, Jennifer Keelan, and Pauline M.H. Mazumdar (eds),
2008,
Crafting Immunity: Working Histories of Clinical
Immunology
, Aldershot, UK and Burlington, VT: Ashgate
Publishing.
Kurashima, Yosuke and Hiroshi Kiyono, 2017, “Mucosal
Ecological Network of Epithelium and Immune Cells for Gut Homeostasis
and Tissue Healing”,
Annual Review of Immunology
, 35:
119–147. doi:10.1146/annurev-immunol-051116-052424
Lafferty, Kevin J., 1995, “Politics, Personalities and the
Development of Science”,
Immunology and Cell Biology
,
73(1): 1–7. doi:10.1038/icb.1995.1
Lakoff, George and Mark Johnson, 1980,
Metaphors We Live
By
, Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press
Lenz, Kathryn M. and Lars H. Nelson, 2018, “Microglia and
Beyond: Innate Immune Cells As Regulators of Brain Development and
Behavioral Function”,
Frontiers in Immunology
, 13: 698.
doi:10.3389/fimmu.2018.00698
León-Letelier, Ricardo A., Laura C. Bonifaz, and Ezequiel
M. Fuentes-Pananá, 2019, “OMIC Signatures to Understand
Cancer Immunosurveillance and Immunoediting: Melanoma and Immune Cells
Interplay in Immunotherapy”,
Journal of Leukocyte
Biology
, 105(5): 915–933. doi:10.1002/JLB.MR0618-241RR
Lewin, Kurt, 1922,
Der Begriff der Genese in Physik, Biologie
und Entwicklungsgeschichte
, Berlin: Springer.
Levins, Richard and Richard Lewontin, 1985,
The Dialectical
Biologist
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ley, Ruth E., Fredrik Bäckhed, Peter Turnbaugh, Catherine A.
Lozupone, Robin D. Knight, and Jeffrey I. Gordon, 2005, “Obesity
Alters Gut Microbial Ecology”,
Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science (USA)
, 102(31): 11070–11075.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0504978102
Locke, John, 1689,
An Essay Concerning Human
Understanding
, London; reprinted, Philadelphis: James Kay,
1800.
Love, Alan C., 2008, “Explaining Evolutionary Innovation and
Novelty: Criteria of Adequacy and Multidisciplinary
Prerequisites”,
Philosophy of Science
, 75(5):
874–886. doi:10.1086/594531
–––, 2018, “Individuation, Individuality,
and Experimental Practice in Developmental Biology”, in
Individuation, Process and Scientific Practices
,
Otávio Bueno, Ruey- Lin Chen, and Melinda Bonnie Fagan (eds),
Oxford University Press, pp. 165–191.
doi:10.1093/oso/9780190636814.003.0008
Love, Alan C. and Ingo Brigandt, 2017, “Philosophical
Dimensions of Individuality”, in Scott Lidgard and Lynn K.
Nyhart (eds),
Biological Individuality: Integrating Scientific,
Philosophical, and Historical Perspectives
, Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, pp: 318–348.
Love, Alan C. and Gary L. Lugar, 2013, “Dimensions of
Integration in Interdisciplinary Explanations of the Origin of
Evolutionary Novelty”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences
, 44(4): 537–550.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2013.09.008
Löwy, Ilana, 1986, “The Epistemology of the Science of
an Epistemologist of the Sciences: Ludwik Fleck’s Professional
Outlook and Its Relationship to His Philosophical Works”, in
Cognition and Fact
, Robert S. Cohen and Thomas Schnelle
(eds.), (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science 87), Dordrecht:
Springer Netherlands, 421–442.
doi:10.1007/978-94-009-4498-5_22
–––, 1991, “The Immunological Construction
of the Self”, in
Organism and the Origins of Self
,
Alfred I. Tauber (ed.), Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp.
43–75.
–––, 2008, “Immunology in the Clinics:
Reductionism, Holism or Both?”, in Kroker, Keelan, and Mazumdar
2008: 165–176.
Mackie, David, 1999, “Personal Identity and Dead
People”,
Philosophical Studies
, 95(3):
219–242.
Maley C.C., A. Aktipis, T.A. Graham, A. Sottoriva, A.M. Boddy, M.
Janiszewska, A.S. Silva, M. Gerlinger, Y. Yuan, K.J. Pienta, K.S.
Anderson, R. Gatenby, C. Swanton, D. Posada, C.I. Wu, J.D. Schiffman,
E.S. Hwang, K. Polyak, A.R.A. Anderson, J.S. Brown, M. Greaves, and D.
Shibata, 2017, “Classifying the Evolutionary and Ecological
Features of Neoplasms”,
Nature Reviews Cancer
, 17(10):
605–619. doi:10.1038/nrc.2017.69
Margulis, Lynn, Celeste A. Asikainen, and Wolfgang E. Krumbein
(eds), 2011,
Chimera and Consciousness. Evolution of the Sensory
Self
, Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Martin, Aryn, 2010, “Microchimerism in the Mother(land):
Blurring the Borders of Body and Nation”,
Body &
Society
, 16(3): 23–50. doi:10.1177/1357034X10373404
Martin, Emily, 1994,
Flexible Bodies. The Role of Immunity in
American Culture from the Days of Polio to the Age of AIDS
,
Boston: Beacon Press.
Matthen, Mohan and Edwin Levy, 1984, “Teleology, Error and
the Human Immune System”,
Journal of Philosophy
, 81(7):
351–372. doi:10.2307/2026291
Matzinger, Polly, 1994, “Tolerance, Danger, and the Extended
Family”,
Annual Review of Immunology
, 12:
991–1045. doi:10.1146/annurev.iy.12.040194.005015
Mazzocchi, Fulvio, 2012, “Complexity and the
Reductionism-Holism Debate in Systems Biology”,
Wiley
Interdisciplinary Reviews: Systems Biology and Medicine
, 4(5):
413–427. doi:10.1002/wsbm.1181
Mead, George H., 1962,
Mind, Self and Society. From the
Standpoint of a Social Behaviorist
, Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Meincke, Anne S., 2018, “Persons as Biological Processes: A
Bio-Processual Way Out of the Personal Identity Dilemma”, in
Nicholson and Dupré 2018: 357–378.
Melander, Peter, 1993, “How Not to Explain the Errors of the
Immune System”,
Philosophy of Science
, 60(2):
223–241. doi:10.1086/289730
Merlin, Francesca, 2010, “Evolutionary Chance Mutation: A
Defense of the Modern Synthesis’ Consensus View”,
Philosophy and Theory in Biology
, 2(201306): 22pp.
doi:10.3998/ptb.6959004.0002.003
Metchnikoff, Élie, 1901 [1905],
L’Immunité
dans les maladies infectieuses
, Paris. Translated as
Immunity
in Infective Diseases
, F.G. Binnie (trans.), Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1905.
Méthot, Pierre-Olivier, 2012, “Why Do Parasites Harm
Their Host? On the Origin and Legacy of Theobald Smith’s
‘Law of Declining virulence’—1900–1980”,
History and Philosophy of the Life Sciences
, 34(4):
561–601.
Méthot, Pierre-Olivier and Samuel Alizon, 2014, “What
Is a Pathogen? Toward a Process View of Host-Parasite
Interactions”,
Virulence
, 5(8): 775–785.
doi:10.4161/21505594.2014.960726
Mingers, John, 1991, “The Cognitive Theories of Maturana and
Varela”,
Systems Practice
, 4(4): 319–338.
doi:10.1007/BF01062008
Mitchell, Sandra D., 2003,
Biological Complexity and
Integrative Pluralism
, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Mor, Gil, Paulomi Aldo, and Ayesha B. Alvero, 2017, “The
Unique Immunological and Microbial Aspects of Pregnancy”,
Nature Reviews Immunology
, 17(8), 469–482.
doi:10.1038/nri.2017.64
Mueller, Noel T., Elizabeth Bakacs, Joan Combellick, Zoya
Grigoryan, and Maria G. Dominguez-Bello, 2015, “The Infant
Microbiome Development: Mom Matters”,
Trends in Molecular
Medicine
, 21(2): 109–117.
doi:10.1016/j.molmed.2014.12.002
Myers, Darienne R., Julie Zikherman, and Jeroen P. Roose, 2017,
“Tonic Signals: Why Do Lymphocytes Bother?”,
Trends in
Immunology
, 38(11): 844–857.
doi:10.1016/j.it.2017.06.010
Napier. David A., 2003,
The Age of Immunology: Conceiving A
Future in an Alienating World
, Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Nataf, Serge, 2016, “Clonal Selection Versus Clonal
Cooperation: The Integrated Perception of Immune Objects”,
F1000Research
, 5: 2226.
doi:10.12688/f1000research.9386.1
Nathan, Marco J., 2014, “Molecular Ecosystems”,
Biology and Philosophy
, 29(1): 101–122.
doi:10.1007/s10539-013-9400-4
Nicholson, Daniel J. and John Dupré (eds), 2018,
Everything Flows. Towards a Processual Philosophy of Biology
,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Odling-Smee, John, Douglas H. Erwin, Eric P. Palkovacs, Marcus W.
Feldman, and Kevin N. Laland, 2013, “Niche Construction Theory:
A Practical Guide for Ecologists”,
The Quarterly Review of
Biology,
88(1): 4–28. doi:10.1086/669266
Odling-Smee, John, Kevin Laland, and Marcus W. Feldman, 2003,
Niche Construction: The Neglected Process in Evolution
,
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Ohno, Susumu, 1990, “Commentary on ‘The Protection:
the Evolutionarily Selected Unit of Humoral Immunity’”,
Immunological Reviews
, 115(1): 191–194.
doi:10.1111/j.1600-065x.1990.tb00788.x
Olson, Eric T., 1997,
The Human Animal: Personal Identity
Without Psychology
, New York: Oxford University Press.
O’Malley, Maureen, 2014,
Philosophy of
Microbiology
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
O’Malley, Maureen A. and John Dupré, 2007,
“Size Doesn’t Matter: Towards a More Inclusive Philosophy
of Biology”,
Biology & Philosophy
, 22(2):
155–191. doi:10.1007/s10539-006-9031-0
Orosz, Charles G., 2001, “An Introduction to Immuno-ecology
and Immuno-informatics”, in Segel and Cohen 2001:
125–149.
Palacios, Adrián G. and Juan Bacigalupo, 2003,
“Francisco Varela (1946–2001): Filling the Mind-Brain Gap:
A Life Adventure”,
Biological Research
, 36(1):
9–12. doi:10.4067/s0716-97602003000100002
Piattelli-Palmarini, Massimo, 1986, “The Rise of Selective
Theories: A Case Study and Some Lessons From Immunology”, in
Language Learning and Concept Acquisition
, William Demopoulos
and Ausonio Marras (eds), Norwood, N.J.: Ablex.
Plutynski, Anya, 2013, “Cancer and the Goals of
Integration”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 44(4): 466–476.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2013.03.019
Podolsky, Scott H. and Alfred I. Tauber, 1997,
The Generation
of Diversity: Clonal Selection Theory and the Rise of Molecular
Immunology
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Poletaev, Alexander B., Vladimir L. Stepanyuk, and M. Eric
Gershwin, 2008, “Integrating Immunity: The Immunculus and
Self-reactivity”,
Journal of Autoimmunity
,
30(1–2): 68–73. doi:10.1016/j.jaut.2007.11.012
Powell, Alexander and Dupré John, 2009, “From
Molecules to Systems: The Importance of Looking Both Ways”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in
History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
,
40(1): 54–64. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2008.12.007
Pradeu, Thomas, 2012,
The Limits of the Self. Immunology and
Biological Identity
, New York: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2016, “Organisms or Biological
Individuals? Combining Physiological and Evolutionary
Individuality”,
Biology & Philosophy
, 31(6):
797–817. doi:10.1007/s10539-016-9551-1
–––, 2018, “Genidentity and Biological
Processes”, in: Nicholson and Dupré 2018:
96–112.
–––, 2019, “Philosophy of CRISPR-Cas:
Introduction to Eugene Koonin’s target paper and
commentaries”,
Biology and Philosophy
, 34(1).
doi:10.1007/s10539-018-9664-9
Pradeu, Thomas and Edgardo D. Carosella, 2006a, “The Self
Model and the Conception of Biological Identity in Immunology”,
Biology and Philosophy
, 21(2): 235–252.
doi:10.1007/s10539-005-8621-6
–––, 2006b, “On the Definition of a
Criterion of Immunogenicity”,
Proceedings of the National
Academy of Science (USA)
, 103(47): 17858–17861.
858–61. doi:10.1073/pnas.0608683103
Pradeu, Thomas, Sébastien Jaeger, and Eric Vivier, 2013,
“The Speed of Change: Towards a Discontinuity Theory of
Immunity?”,
Nature Reviews Immunology
, 13:
764–769. doi:10.1038/nri3521
Queller, David C. and Joan E. Strassman, 2009, “Beyond
Society: The Evolution of Organismality”,
Philosophical
Transactions Royal Society London B, Biological Science
,
364(1533): 3143–55. doi:10.1098/rstb.2009.0095
Ramos, Gustavo C., 2012, “Inflammation as an Animal
Development Phenomenon”,
Clinical and Developmental
Immunology
, 2012: 1–8. doi:10.1155/2012/983203
Reynolds, Andrew S., 2018,
The Third Lens: Metaphor and the
Creation of Modern Cell Biology
, Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press.
Rivas A.L., G. Leitner, M.D. Jankowski, A.L. Hoogesteijn, M.J.
Iandiorio, S. Chatzipanagiotou, A. Ioannidis, S.E. Blum, R. Piccinini,
A. Antoniades, J.C. Fazio, Y. Apidianakis, J.M. Fair, and M.H.V. Van
Regenmortel, 2017, “Nature and Consequences of Biological
Reductionism for the Immunological Study of Infectious
Diseases”,
Frontiers in Immunology
, 8: 612.
doi:10.3389/fimmu.2017.00612
Roland, Alan, 1988,
In Search of Self in India and Japan.
Toward a Cross-cultural Psychology
, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Rosenberg, Alexander, 1989, “Perceptual Presentations and
Biological Function: A Comment on Matthen”,
Journal of
Philosophy
, 86(1): 38–44. doi:10.2307/2027175
Roux, Wilhelm, 1881,
Der Kampf der Teile im Organismus
,
Leipzig: W. Engelmann.
Roy, Nilotpal and Matthias Hebrok, 2015, “Regulation of
Cellular Identity in Cancer”,
Developmental Cell
,
35(6): 674–684. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2015.12.001
Sarkar, Sahotra, 1991, “Lamarck Contre Darwin, Reduction
Versus Statistics: Conceptual Issues in the Controversy Over Directed
Mutagenesis in Bacteria”, in
Organisms and the Origins of
Self
, Alfred I. Tauber (ed.), The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic,
pp. 253–271.
–––, 1998,
Genetics and Reductionism
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sarkar, Sahotra and Anya Plutynski (eds), 2010,
A Companion to
the Philosophy of Biology
, Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Schaffner, Kenneth F., 1980, “Theory Structure in the
Biomedical Sciences”,
Journal of Medicine and
Philosophy
, 5(1): 57–97. doi:10.1093/jmp/5.1.57
Schatz, Michael C. and Ben Langmead 2013, “The DNA Data
Deluge. Fast, Efficient Genome Sequencing Machines are Spewing Out
More Data than Geneticists can Analyze”,
IEEE Spectrum
,
50(7): 26–33. doi:10.1109/MSPEC.2013.6545119
Segel, Lee A. and Irun R. Cohen (eds), 2001,
Design Principles
for the Immune System and Other Distributed Autonomous Systems
,
New York: Oxford University Press.
Shapiro, James A., 2011,
Evolution: A View from the 21st
Century
, Upper Saddle River, NJ: FT Press.
Shapiro, Lawrence A., 2011,
Embodied Cognition
, New York:
Routledge.
Silverstein, Arthur M., 2009,
A History of Immunology
,
2nd edition, Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Simon, A. Katharina, Georg A. Hollander, and Andrew McMichael,
2015, “Evolution of the Immune System in Humans From Infancy to
Old Age”,
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological
Sciences
, 282(1821): 20143085. doi:10.1098/rspb.2014.3085
Skillings, Derek, 2016, “Holobionts and the Ecology of
Organisms: Multi-Species Communities or Integrated
Individuals?”,
Biology and Philosophy
, 31:
875–892. doi:10.1007/s10539-016-9544-0
Sloterdijk, Peter, 2011,
Bubbles: Spheres Volume 1.
Microspherology
, Cambridge, MA: Semiotext(e).
Sober, Elliott, 2000,
Philosophy of Biology
, 2nd Edition,
Boulder: Westview.
Soderborg T.K., S.E. Clark, C.E. Mulligan, R.C. Janssen, L.
Babcock, D. Ir, D.J. Lemas, L.K. Johnson, T. Weir, L.L. Lenz, D.N.
Frank, T.L. Hernandez, K.A. Kuhn, A. D’Alessandro, L.A. Barbour,
K.C. El Kasmi, and J.E. Friedman, 2018, “The Gut Microbiota in
Infants of Obese Mothers Increases Inflammation and Susceptibility to
NAFLD”,
Nature Communications
, 9(1): 4462.
doi:10.1038/s41467-018-06929-0
Söderqvist, Thomas, 2003,
Science as Autobiography: The
Troubled Life of Niels Jerne
, New Haven, CT: Yale University
Press.
Sontag, Susan, 1990,
Illness as Metaphor and AIDS and Its
Metaphors
, New York: Anchor Books.
Swann, Jeremy B. and Mark J. Smyth, 2007, “Immune
Surveillance of Tumors”,
Journal of Clinical
Investigation
, 117(5): 1137–1146. doi:10.1172/JCI31405
Swiatczak, Bartlomiej, 2014, “Immune Balance: The
Development of the Idea and Its Applications”,
Journal of
the History of Biology
, 47(3): 411–42.
doi:10.1007/s10739-013-9370-z
Swiatczak Bartlomiej, Rescigno Maria, and Irun R. Cohen, 2011,
“Systemic Features of Immune Recognition in the Gut”,
Microbes and Infection
, 13(12–13): 983–991.
doi:10.1016/j.micinf.2011.06.011
Tauber, Alfred I., 1994,
The Immune Self: Theory or
Metaphor?
, New York: Cambridge University Press.
–––, 2000, “Moving Beyond the Immune
Self?”,
Seminars in Immunology
, 12(3): 241–248.
doi:10.1006/smim.2000.0237
–––, 2008, “The Immune System and Its
Ecology”,
Philosophy of Science
, 75(2): 224–245
doi:10.1086/590200
–––, 2013, “Immunology’s Theories of
Cognition”,
History and Philosophy of the Life
Sciences
, 35(2): 239–264.
–––, 2015, “Reconceiving Autoimmunity: An
Overview”,
Journal of Theoretical Biology
, 375:
52–60. doi:10.1016/j.jtbi.2014.05.029
–––, 2016, “Immunity in Context: Science
and Society in Dialogue”,
THEORIA. An International Journal
for Theory, History and Foundations of Science
, 31(2):
207–24. doi:10.1387/theoria.14560
–––, 2017,
Immunity: The Evolution of an
Idea
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Tauber, Alfred I. and Leon Chernyak, 1991,
Metchnikoff and the
Origins of Immunology: From Metaphor to Theory
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Tonegawa, S., C. Steinberg, S. Dube, and A. Bernardini, 1974,
“Evidence for Somatic Generation of Antibody Diversity”,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Science (USA)
, 71(10):
4027–4031. doi:10.1073/pnas.71.10.4027
Ulvestad, Elling, 2007,
Defending Life. The Nature of
Host-Parasite Relations
, Dordrecht: Springer.
van Baalen, Minus and Philippe Huneman, 2014, “Organisms as
Ecosystems/Ecosystems as Organisms”,
Biological Theory
,
9(4): 357–360. doi:10.1007/s13752-014-0194-7
van Inwagen, Peter, 1990,
Material Beings
, Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press.
van Regenmortel, Marc H.V., 2002, “Pitfalls of Reductionism
in Immunology”, in
Promises and Limits of Reductionism in
the Biomedical Sciences
, Mark van Regenmortel and David L. Hull
(eds), Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, pp. 47–66.
Varela, Francisco J., 1991, “Organism: A Meshwork of
Selfless Selves”, in
Organism and the Origin of Self
,
Alfred I. Tauber (ed.), Dordrecht: Kluwer, pp. 79–107.
–––, 1994, “A Cognitive View of the Immune
System”,
World Futures
, 42(1–2):
31–40.
Varela, Francisco J. and António Coutinho, 1991,
“Immuknowledge: Learning Mechanisms of Somatic
Individuation”, in
Doing Science
, John Brockman (ed.),
New York: Prentice-Hall, pp. 237–256.
Varela, Francisco J., António Coutinho, B. Dupire, and
Nelson M. Vaz, 1988, “Cognitive Networks: Immune, Neural, and
Otherwise”, in
Theoretical Immunology, Part Two
, Alan
S. Perelson (ed.), Redwood City, CA: Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.,
pp. 359–375.
Vaz, Nelson M., 2011a, “Francisco Varela and the
Immunological Self”,
Systems Research and Behavioral
Science
, 28(6): 696–703. doi:10.1002/sres.1126
–––, 2011b, “The Specificity of
Immunological Observations”,
Constructivist
Foundations
, 6(3): 334–342.
Vaz, Nelson M. and Francisco J. Varela, 1978, “Self and
Non-sense: an Organism-Centered Approach to Immunology”,
Medical Hypotheses
, 4(3): 231–267.
doi:10.1016/0306-9877(78)90005-1
Virgin, Herbert W., E. John Wherry, and Rafi Ahmed, 2009,
“Redefining Chronic Viral Infection”,
Cell
,
138(1): 30–50. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2009.06.036
Virchow, Rudolf, 1858 [1863],
Die Cellularpathologie in ihrer
Begründung auf physiologische und pathologische Gewebelehre
,
Berlin: August Hirschwald. Translated as
Cellular Pathology as
Based Upon Physiological and Pathological Histology
, Frank Chance
(trans.), Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott, 1863.
Wagner, Günter P., Eric M. Erkenbrack and Alan C. Love, 2019,
“Stress-Induced Evolutionary Innovation: A Mechanism for the
Origin of Cell Types”,
Bioessays
, 41(4): e1800188.
doi:10.1002/bies.201800188
Wagner, Robert P., 1999, “Anecdotal, Historical and Critical
Commentaries on Genetics. Rudolph Virchow and the Genetic Basis of
Somatic Ecology”,
Genetics
, 151(3): 917–920.
Weasel, Lisa, 2001, “Dismantling the Self/Other Dichotomy in
Science: Towards a Feminist Model of the Immune System”,
Hypatia
16(1): 27–44.
doi:10.1111/j.1527-2001.2001.tb01047.x
Weiss, Adam, 2015, “Lamarckian Illusions”,
Trends
in Ecology & Evolution
, 30(10): 566–568.
doi:10.1016/j.tree.2015.08.003
Wideman, Jeremy G., S. Andrew Inkpen, W. Ford Doolittle and
Rosemary J. Redfield, 2019, “Mutationism, not Lamarckism,
Captures the Novelty of CRISPR–Cas”:,
Biology and
Philosophy
, 34(1). doi:10.1007/s10539-018-9659-6
Wimsatt, William C., 2007,
Re-engineering Philosophy for
Limited Beings: Piecewise Approximations to Reality
, Cambridge,
MA: Harvard University Press.
Wolkenhauer, Olaf and Sara Green, 2013, “The Search for
Organizing Principles as a Cure Against Reductionism in Systems
Medicine”,
FEBS Journal
, 280(23): 5938–5948.
doi:10.1111/febs.12311
Woolley, Sam, Emily C. Parke, David Kelley, Anthony M. Poole, and
Austen R. D. Ganley, 2019, “Striving for Clarity About the
‘Lamarckian’ Nature of CRISPR-Cas Systems”,
Biology and Philosophy
, 34(1).
doi:10.1007/s10539-018-9662-y
Wynn, Thomas A., Ajay Chawla and Jeffrey W. Pollard, 2013,
“Macrophage Biology in Development, Homeostasis and
Disease”,
Nature
, 496(7446): 445–455.
doi:10.1038/nature12034
Zmora, Niv, Stavros Bashiardes, Maayan Levy, and Eran Elinav,
2017, “The Role of the Immune System in Metabolic Health and
Disease”,
Cell Metabolism
, 25(3): 506–521.
doi:10.1016/j.cmet.2017.02.006
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Nuño de la Rosa, Laura, Mihaela Pavlicev, and Arantza
Etxeberria, 2019, 
“
Rethinking the Individuality of Pregnancy: Eutherian Pregnancy as an Evolved Relational Novelty
”,
Preprints
, 2019100127.
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases: Immune System Research
Related Entries
animalism
|
biological individuals
|
biology: philosophy of
|
causation: probabilistic
|
causation: the metaphysics of
|
consciousness: representational theories of
|
feminist philosophy, topics: perspectives on the self
|
genomics and postgenomics
|
identity: over time
|
inheritance systems
|
models in science
|
personal identity
|
pregnancy, birth, and medicine
|
reduction, scientific: in biology
|
scientific knowledge: social dimensions of
|
systems and synthetic biology, philosophy of
|
teleology: teleological notions in biology