Philosophy of Macroevolution
First published Mon Jun 3, 2019
Macroevolution refers (most of the time, in practice) to evolutionary
patterns and processes above the species level. It is usually
contrasted with microevolution, or evolutionary change within
populations. This customary way of drawing the macro/micro distinction
is not perfect, however, because species sometimes consist of multiple
populations. Some evolutionary processes, such as the spread of a
trait from one population to another, might count as within-species
processes but not within-population processes.
Population genetics (see entry)
,
 which emerged during the modern synthesis of the early- to
mid-twentieth century, explains within-population microevolutionary
change in terms of
natural selection
,
genetic drift
, mutation, and migration.
One question that looms over philosophical work on macroevolutionary
theory is how macroevolution and microevolution are related. One view,
which is closely associated with the modern synthesis, is that
macroevolutionary patterns are fully explicable in terms of
microevolutionary processes. On this view, macroevolution is
“nothing but” successive rounds of microevolution (a
formulation due to Grantham 2007). Stephen Jay Gould pejoratively
referred to this kind of view as “extrapolationism” (Gould
2002). This issue links up with more general philosophical questions
about the potential reduction of higher-level biological phenomena to
lower levels (Oppenheimer & Putnam 1958; Fodor 1974; Kitcher 1984;
Sarkar 1992, Rosenberg 1997).
During the paleobiological revolution of the 1970s and 1980s, a number
of paleontologists sought to establish paleontology’s status as
an evolutionary discipline, with something to say about evolutionary
theory. This shift was reflected in the decision to use the term
‘paleobiology’ (Sepkoski & Ruse 2009). For some of these
scientists of the 1970s
and 1980s, the disciplinary autonomy of paleobiology was closely
linked to ideas about macroevolution. As Steven Stanley (1975) put it,
their thought was that macroevolution is “uncoupled” from
microevolution, and that macroevolutionary patterns sometimes require
explanation in terms of macro-level processes. One early move in this
direction was the construction of the MBL model (Gould, Raup,
Sepkoski, Schopf, and Simberloff 1977), a computer simulation of
macroevolutionary processes that explicitly ignored microevolutionary
factors such as natural selection (Sepkoski 2012). Today, this
approach is sometimes known as the “hierarchical
expansion” of evolutionary theory, and it remains the focus of
quite a bit of theoretical work (see, e.g., Eldredge, Pievani,
Serrelli, & Temkin 2016).
Since the 1970s, theorizing about macroevolution has focused on
several important ideas: punctuated equilibria, species selection,
hierarchical theory, historical contingency, passive vs. driven
evolutionary trends, major evolutionary transitions, and more recently
the zero-force evolutionary law (or
ZFEL
) defended by McShea
and Brandon (2010). One philosophical challenge is to understand the
relationships among these ideas; another is to work out what they
might mean for the relationship between macro- and microevolution.
The fossil record is the chief source of empirical evidence concerning
macroevolutionary patterns, and so macroevolutionary theory is closely
associated with paleontology. In addition to questions of
macroevolutionary theory
per se
, there are also
epistemological questions about how paleontologists infer pattern from
process, and how they correct for biases in the fossil data (Bokulich
forthcoming). In addition, the distinction between macroevolution and
microevolution sometimes mirrors the distinction between paleontology,
with its focus on the fossil record, and neontology, with its focus on
observable, extant populations. For this reason, metaphysical
questions about the relationship between macro- and microevolution are
sometimes difficult to disentangle from epistemological questions
about what sorts of things can be inferred from different evidence
bases.
1. Punctuated Equilibria
2. Species Selection
3. Hierarchical Theory
4. Theory Accommodation and Change
5. Issues of Rhetoric and Risk
6. Historical Contingency
7. Passive vs. Driven Trends
8. The Zero-Force Evolutionary Law
9. Major Evolutionary Transitions
10. The (Dis)unity of Macroevolutionary Theory
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Punctuated Equilibria
The classic paper on punctuated equilibria (PE) was co-authored by
Niles Eldredge and Stephen Jay Gould (1972), although Eldredge (1971)
was originally responsible for the idea. Their (1972) presentation of
PE draws heavily on themes from Thomas Kuhn’s (1962) work, as
they present PE as a new paradigm to rival traditional Darwinian
gradualism (Turner 2011b: chapter 2). Far from challenging the modern
synthesis in that early work, they present PE as a straightforward
consequence of allopatric speciation (speciation driven by isolating
geographic change). Eldredge and Gould reasoned that if speciation
were typically allopatric, then it would tend to happen fairly rapidly
in geological terms, and new species would be geographically distant
from parent species. Consequently, in the fossil record, one should
not expect to see very many cases where a fossil series documents a
clear and gradual transition from one species to another. Eldredge and
Gould also argued that most morphological change occurs in
(geologically) rapid spurts during speciation events and that new
species, once they arise, typically exhibit stasis.
When Eldredge and Gould (1972) introduced punctuated equilibria, the
received view of expected morphological change via evolution was that
of phyletic gradualism. This is a notion that can be traced all the
way from Darwin’s
Origin of Species
to, for instance,
Simpson (1970). In accepting phyletic gradualism, paleontologists had
long had to accept that the incompleteness of the fossil record was
significantly responsible for the lack of (ideally expected)
geological documentation of gradual transformation in the majority of
fossilized speciation events. What Eldredge and Gould uniquely
realized, however, was that the expectation of phyletic gradualism
clashed not only with what the fossil record actually showed, but also
with what the dominant model of (allopatric) speciation predicted. So
they developed PE: an alternative view of morphological evolution (and
stasis) intended to synthesize what allopatric speciation projected
with what the fossil record depicted.
In the
Origin of Species
, Darwin had attributed the lack of
fossil series exhibiting gradual morphological transition to the
incompleteness of the fossil record. He thought of speciation and
morphological evolution as gradual processes (though he did
acknowledge variation in evolutionary rates), and thought that they
often happen under the geological radar. As he put it: “Nature
may almost be said to have guarded against the frequent discovery of
her transitional or linking forms” (Darwin 1859 [1964: 292]).
Eldredge and Gould were, in contrast, proposing that the fossil record
is more complete than it seems, and that we should take the rapid
appearance of new species more or less at face value. As they
eventually put it, in designing the theory of punctuated equilibrium
they were “hoping to validate our profession’s primary
data as signal rather than void” (Gould & Eldredge 1993:
223). One epistemological issue in play here is whether the absence of
evidence—in this case, the absence of evidence of gradual
evolutionary change—is really evidence of absence (Sober 2009;
Currie & Turner 2017).
The ensuing debate about punctuated equilibria proved to be complex
and contentious. Gould, in particular, made increasingly bold and
controversial claims on behalf of PE during the 1980s, and he tended
to see PE as the opening wedge for a more ambitious critique of the
modern synthesis. Notoriously, Gould also flirted with non-Darwinian
accounts of speciation, such as Richard Goldschmidt’s (1940)
idea that new species arise from “hopeful monsters” (Gould
1977). The stasis claim of PE was also controversial, especially since
Gould took it to mean that cumulative, directional natural selection
is a less significant factor in evolution than many had thought. The
reasoning was that if directional natural selection were the dominant
driver of evolutionary change, then you would not expect to see such
clear patterns of stasis in the fossil record. PE elicited a great
deal of opposition from biologists and philosophers who were more
committed to a selectionist picture of evolution (Dawkins 1986;
Dennett 1995; and see Sterelny 2001a for a useful guide to the
controversy).
In the meantime, PE also inspired new empirical research in
paleontology, with scientists doing statistical analysis of large
fossil samples to try to assess the relative importance of stasis vs.
gradual directional change. This research continues to get more
sophisticated, and as it happens, PE has fared reasonably well,
empirically (J. Jackson & Cheetham 1999; Hunt 2007; Uyeda, Hansen,
Arnold, & Pienaar 2011).
One other philosophical issue raised by PE concerns the explanation of
evolutionary stasis (Turner 2017). Eldredge and Gould never really
offered a very clear account of the mechanism(s) that could maintain
stasis, a fact that critics often seized upon (e.g., Coyne &
Charlesworth 1996). They did propose that species might be homeostatic
systems. To make matters worse, there is a mismatch between the fossil
evidence (where stasis is common) and studies of extant populations
that show lots of directional evolutionary change (Price, Grant,
Gibbs, & Boag 1984; Endler 1986; Lenski & Travisano 1994;
Harshman & Hoffmann 2000), a puzzle sometimes called the
“paradox of stasis” (Hendry 2007). Many evolutionary
biologists (e.g. Estes and Arnold 2007) are quick to attribute stasis
at larger scales to well-known processes such as stabilizing selection
and/or habitat tracking, but Kaplan (2009) raises some critical
questions about that move. And Sterelny (2001b) has pointed out that
cases of “coordinated stasis” in the fossil record pose
special explanatory challenges. Coordinated stasis is a pattern where
a whole ecological assemblage seems to persist without change for
millions of years. Stasis, the idea at the heart of PE, remains an
issue of considerable theoretical and empirical interest in
paleontology (Lidgard & Hopkins 2015; Lidgard & Love
2018).
2. Species Selection
If punctuated equilibria (PE) was the first innovative idea about
macroevolution to emerge during the 1970s, species selection followed
close on its heels. Just how the two ideas are related is itself a
topic of some philosophical interest (Turner 2010). According to
Eldredge and Gould (1972), driven or
directional
change is
only part of the theoretical story about the evolution of morphology;
it is not, perhaps, even a geologically common narrative. Directional
selection is selection that changes a population, pushing its
distribution of traits from one pattern of trait expression to
another. More typical, according the Eldredge and Gould, are cases of
either
non-directional
change or even
stasis
. Like
directional selection, nondirectional selection also changes a
population, but not towards any particular distribution of
traits—it just moves a population from one pattern to another.
Stabilizing selection is selection that keeps a population the same,
nudging it back to its trait distribution pattern whenever it starts
to stray away. PE as originally formulated favors stabilizing
selection, suggesting that both individuals and species are inherently
stable homeostatic systems—systems that are “amazingly
well-buffered to resist change and maintain stability in the face of
disturbing influences” (Eldredge & Gould 1972: 114). On this
view, whatever the mechanisms that “resist change and maintain
stability” are, they are in conflict with and must be overcome
by directional natural selection in order for natural selection to
successfully push for or “force” directional change.
Whether natural selection is properly thought of as a force is itself
an interesting philosophical issue (Sober 1984; Walsh 2000; Matthen
& Ariew 2002; Walsh, Lewens, & Ariew 2002; Bouchard &
Rosenberg 2004; Stephens 2004; Brandon 2006; Millstein 2006; Filler
2009). Setting that question aside, however, allows us to consider the
suggestion that species might be homeostatic systems which
“resist change by self-regulation” (Eldredge & Gould
1972: 114)—as this is a suggestion rife with implications for
macroevolutionary theory.
At first, the idea that species are homeostatic systems may have been
a way of addressing critics of PE, who wondered what sort of
biological mechanisms could maintain stasis over long stretches of
geological time. However, it is a short step from thinking of species
as homeostatic systems to thinking of them as the sort of thing that
could be a unit of selection. Eldredge and Gould thought that
variation introduced amongst organisms is typically isolated within
the population and constrained by stabilizing selection, unless
geographic separation creates the conditions for rapid evolutionary
change. During allopatric speciation events, the adaptive forces
negate the stabilizing ones effectively enough to disrupt the stasis
of the species and cause the formation of a new lineage. Eventually
though, the stabilizing forces (re)assert themselves upon the emergent
species and (re)establish stasis. Most biologists think of stabilizing
selection as an ordinary microevolutionary process (Schmalhausen
1949); however, the suggestion that a species is a homeostatic system
makes it look like some form of stabilizing selection might be
operating (in some sense) as a mechanism that maintains equilibrium at
the level of populations.
When modeling how these interactions generate macroevolutionary
patterns, PE presents the dominant (i.e., equilibrium) state as one of
population-level morphological stasis—a state in which
speciation attempts often occur but generally fail to take. These
periods of stasis are occasionally interrupted (i.e., punctuated) by
periods of population-level morphological change—periods of
successful speciation. This bifurcated model (depicting states of both
stasis and change) is one in which species behave a little bit like
organisms: speciation begins to look like reproduction, and extinction
begins to look like death. Crucial to this picture is the claim that
once a new species comes into existence, it mostly exhibits stasis.
The analogy is by no means perfect (Havstad 2016 in Other Internet
Resources), but it did open up a new field of theoretical exploration.
What if the differential speciation and extinction of whole lineages
is a lot like the differential survival and reproduction of
individuals in a population? PE may not logically imply species
selection, but it does point in that direction by suggesting that
species resemble organisms in relevant ways—for instance, by
having comparable integration and cohesion, enough for populations to
block directional change in favor of stasis.
Initially, Eldredge and Gould (1972) were quite explicit that they did
not see their model as entailing a new type of selection. They
straightforwardly wrote “we postulate no ‘new’ type
of selection” (Eldredge & Gould 1972: 112). But in 1975, the
paleontologist and evolutionary theorist Steven M. Stanley dubbed
Eldredge and Gould’s population-level selection process a form
of species selection, and by 1977 the inventors of PE concurred. They
wrote that they nonetheless understood species selection as
representing “no more than the operation of natural selection at
higher levels” (Gould & Eldredge 1977: 139), but still, this
interpretation presents a challenge to one typical way of
instantiating the dominant model of natural selection.
Regarding the dominant model: classically and summarily described (see
Godfrey-Smith 2007), evolution occurs when individuals in a population
accumulate a change to the degree that this change becomes a feature
in the population. On this view, natural selection requires variation,
fitness, and heritability (Lewontin 1970; though see Brandon 1990).
When all three of these things coincide within populations, and change
resultantly accumulates, evolution occurs. Proponents of species
selection argue that these three conditions are met at the species
level.
But on a typical way of instantiating this rather abstract model of
natural selection, one can identify what plays the role of the
individuals in this model (organisms) and what plays the role of the
populations (species). This popular view treats organisms as the units
of selection and species as the units of evolution. Species evolve,
owing to the differential survival and reproduction of organisms. This
emphasis on organism-level selection and species-level evolution is
another which dates back to Darwin’s
Origin of Species
,
although Darwin also countenanced family selection (Darwin 1859),
sexual selection (Darwin 1871) and group selection (Stauffer 1975).
Some early proponents of the modern synthesis (e.g., Mayr 1942, 2001)
also shared this basic picture in which selection acts on organisms,
while species evolve. To propose that selection occurs at the level of
species as opposed to that of organisms, is to suppose that not only
can organisms act as the units of selection but that species can
too.
So, if the proper way to understand natural selection casts organisms
as the units of selection, and species as the unit of evolution, then
Gould and Eldredge’s model of PE challenges that view.
Alternatively, if the proper way to understand natural selection
merely names biological individuals as the units of selection and
biological populations as the unit of evolution, and species can be
biological individuals too, then Gould and Eldredge’s model of
PE is not really a challenge to the model of natural selection, it is
just a new instance of it. This is because the notion of
biological individual (see entry)
is more expansive than that of biological organism; biological
individuals include but are not limited to biological organisms.
Biofilms, coral reefs, insect colonies, obligate symbionts,
siphonophores, slime molds, and viruses are just a few of the many
biological entities that we might want to consider as individuals,
although they are not organisms (see Buss 1983; J. Wilson 1999; Clarke
2010, 2013; and R.A. Wilson & Barker 2013, among others). If
species are themselves individuals (Ghiselin 1974; Hull 1976), then
the traditional evolutionary theorist may be able to accommodate
species-level selection—in this sense, it is just another flavor
of individual-level selection. Note that is it is very easy for this
dispute to become an instance of what the philosopher John Beatty
(1997) calls a “relative significance” debate—one in
which proponents move from arguing about whether something is possible
(species acting as the unit of selection) to whether that thing is
significant (as opposed to a mere oddity).
Many of these issues—such as how to understand stabilizing
mechanisms and selection, what biological individuals are, whether
species are individuals, and whether species-level selection is
reducible to individual-level selection—are ongoing. In the
decades since Eldredge and Gould first outlined the theory of
punctuated equilibria, various biological theorists have attempted to
provide definitive and irreducible examples of species-level
selection—ones that cannot be recreated at lower levels such as
that of the organism. Species-level traits like range size (where a
species may be wide-ranging even though its organisms are not; see
Jablonski 1987) and rate of speciation (where a species may be slow to
“reproduce” although its organisms are not; see Vrba 1987)
are especially promising candidates. In addition to the issue of
providing definitive examples of irreducible species selection, there
is also the issue of providing a satisfactory definition of the
concept itself. The biologist Elisabeth Vrba (1984) posits that all
proposed definitions of species selection ought to identify causes, be
restricted enough for testing, and employ a concept of selection that
is consistent with how selection is understood to act at other levels
as well. See Vrba (1984), Cracraft (1985), Grantham (1995), Jablonski
(2008), and Turner (2011b: chapters 4 and 5) for further discussion of
species selection.
3. Hierarchical Theory
It is worth noting that several discussions of species selection
pre-date Eldredge and Gould’s (1972) proposal (e.g., Fisher
1929, Wright 1956; Lewontin 1970). However, it is the ensuing
discussion of stabilizing selection prompted by PE—in
combination with a contemporaneous uptick in discussion of kin
selection, group selection, and altruism (Haldane 1932; Wright 1945;
Wynne-Edwards 1962; Hamilton 1963; Maynard Smith 1964; Boorman &
Levitt 1973; E.O. Wilson 1973; Levin & Kilmer 1974; D.S. Wilson
1975; Wade 1978)—which transforms these macroevolutionary sparks
into an ongoing, hierarchical conflagration (see Gould 1980b, 1982,
2002; Vrba & Eldredge 1984; Cracraft 1985; Eldredge 1985; Grantham
1995; and Eldredge, Pievani, Serrelli, & Temkin 2016, among
others). Indeed, some theorists see the paleobiological revolution as
contributing to a “hierarchical expansion” of evolutionary
theory.
Evolutionary theorists often distinguish between the unit of selection
(Williams 1966; Franklin & Lewontin 1970; Lewontin 1970) and the
unit of evolution (Williams 1966; Hull 1978; Ereshefsky 1991).
Expanding the category of what can act as a unit of selection leads
directly into a corresponding expansion of what can act as a unit of
evolution. This is how a hierarchical theory of evolution is
theoretically generated: when theoreticians consider not just
organisms or individuals as the
unit of selection (see entry)
but also species and (kin) groups, and genes (for instance), they are
also and correspondingly considering not just species or populations
as the unit of evolution but also clades, and cultures, and cells or
perhaps organisms (respectively). Each proposed unit of selection
incurs another, higher-level candidate for the unit of evolution.
Hierarchical evolutionary theory is just the name for theories of
evolution that admit of different units of selection and evolution
than that of (merely and respectively) organisms or individuals and
species or populations. Hierarchical theorists see evolutionary
processes (especially selection processes) unfolding simultaneously at
different biological levels and temporal scales.
Hierarchical thinking about evolution is perhaps best illustrated with
an example. It has already been noted that one way of explaining
morphological stasis is stabilizing selection. Stabilizing selection
is a well-understood Darwinian mechanism that operates on organisms in
a population. Here, organisms are the units of selection while species
are the units of evolution. But Sheldon (1996) introduced another
potential explanation of stasis, which he called the “plus
ça change” model. Sheldon observed that in times of
environmental turmoil, ecological generalists usually have lower
extinction risk, while ecological specialists are more prone to
extinction. Perhaps surprisingly, then, a pattern of stasis in the
fossil record might be due to the persistence of ecological
generalists during times of environmental upheaval. This model appeals
to species selection, or to the differential extinction and
persistence of whole species, rather than to stabilizing selection
processes occurring within those species. Hierarchical theorists hold
that evolutionary patterns (like stasis) can be generated and
sustained by processes operating at different biological levels.
Altogether, hierarchical evolutionary theory is potentially inclusive
of macroevolutionary processes (such as species selection), along with
paradigmatic microevolutionary processes (such as organism-level
selection), sub-microevolutionary processes (such as genic selection),
and even super-macroevolutionary processes (like clade selection).
Lewontin (1970) considers the possibility of the following acting as
units of selection: molecules, cell organelles, cells themselves,
gametes, individuals (this is the term he uses), kin groups,
populations, species, communities of species, and phyla. Williams
(1966) and Dawkins (1976) are often credited with developing the
notion of genic selectionism.  Debate over genic selectionism—a
theory within which genes are both the units of heredity and the units
of selection—has led to further philosophical discussion
regarding what counts as a replicator as opposed to an interactor
(Hull 1980; Brandon 1988, 1990; Lloyd 1988; Griffiths & Gray 1994,
1997; Sterelny 1996; Sterelny, Smith, & Dickison 1996;
Godfrey-Smith 2000; Griesemer 2000; Nanay 2002).  Various biologists
(e.g., Mayr 1963; Gould 1980a; Lewontin 1991) have ardently disputed
the claim that genes act as direct targets of selection. Philosophers
of biology have taken positions both pro (e.g., Sterelny & Kitcher
1988; Waters 1991) and con (e.g., Sober & D.S. Wilson 1994; Lloyd
2005) on the topic of genic selectionism.
Philosophical discussions of genic selection, clade selection, other
units of selection, and the hierarchical theory of evolution are
extensive and ongoing (in addition to works already cited, see Wimsatt
1980; Kitcher, Sterelny, & Waters 1990; Sober 1990; Godfrey-Smith
& Lewontin 1993; Stanford 2001; Glennan 2002; R.A. Wilson 2003;
Walsh 2004; Waters 2005; and Okasha 2006, among others). Another
interesting, relatively recent, and somewhat related development is
the proposal of a further, even-more-extended evolutionary synthesis,
or EES (Jablonka & Lamb 2005; Pigliucci & Müller 2010;
Laland et al. 2014; though see Wray et al. 2014). Proponents of EES
contend that phenomena such as developmental bias (Arthur 2004), niche
construction (Odling-Smee, Laland, and Feldman 2003), phenotypic
plasticity (West-Eberhard 2003), and non-genetic inheritance processes
like social learning and cultural transmission (Hoppitt & Laland
2013) challenge evolutionary theory as standardly understood.
Opponents contend that the now-traditional theoretical framework
constructed via the modern synthesis can accommodate all these
phenomena and more. See Pigliucci and Finkelman (2014) for a
discussion of the philosophical implications of the EES debate.
4. Theory Accommodation and Change
One meta-scientific issue raised by these macroevolutionary disputes
is just how much a scientific theory can flex and change before it
either becomes a different theory altogether, or it becomes a bad
scientific theory (via too much of what Popper [1974] would call
ad hoc
revisionism).
As an illustrative example, consider punctuated equilibrium, which has
certainty been articulated in many and varying ways. The two initial
publications by Eldredge (1971) and Eldredge and Gould (1972) are
undoubtedly the founding ones, but there are other crucial moments in
the development of the theory (e.g., Gould & Eldredge 1977, 1983,
1986, 1993; Eldredge & Gould 1988; Gould 2002). At times the
shifting nature of PE has been a target of criticism (e.g., Levinton
1986; Coyne & Charlesworth 1997; see Eckhardt 1986 for a
particularly entertaining visit from “the shade of Francis
Galton”).
Another dynamic theoretical dimension of PE, hierarchical theory, and
the like is how radically these scientific notions are
perceived—even by their own creators. In 1982, for instance,
Gould first asked and then answered:
What would a fully elaborated, hierarchically based evolutionary
theory be called? It would neither be Darwinism, as usually
understood, nor a smoothly continuous extension of Darwinism, for it
violates directly the fundamental reductionist tradition embodied in
Darwin’s focus on organisms as units of selection. (1982: 386)
But in 2002, Gould wrote
I do believe that the Darwinian framework, and not just the
foundation, persists in the emerging structure of a more adequate
evolutionary theory. (2002:3)
He devoted much of the extensive efforts of his
Structure of
Evolutionary Theory
to defending an interpretation of Darwinian
evolutionary theory as resting on a revisable “tripod of
necessary support” (Gould 2002: 586)—one whose three
critical supports were challenged by proposed expansions to
evolutionary theory, but which nonetheless could be buttressed via
integration with these challenges, rather than replacement by them. In
short, the later Gould argues that Darwinian evolution traditionally
emphasizes organismic selection, adaptationism, and extrapolationism;
that punctuated equilibria, stabilizing selection, and species
selection challenge the first of these supports, developmental and
other constraints challenge the second, and major evolutionary
transitions challenge the third; but that all three of these
challenges can be accommodated by a revised but still Darwinian
conception of evolutionary theory.
Note that efforts to retain (or reject) the Darwinian label show up in
other contexts as well—for instance, in discussions of
adaptationism (e.g., Gould & Lewontin 1979) and the neutral theory
of molecular evolution (Dietrich 1994). Darwin himself declared that
“He who rejects these views [his] on the nature of the
geological record, will rightly reject my whole theory” (1859
[1964: 342]). Whether or not Darwin’s emphatic claim is correct
is still an open question. Additional philosophical resources on
theoretical and conceptual change in science include but are by no
means limited to Kuhn (1962), LaPorte (2004), and M. Wilson
(2006).
5. Issues of Rhetoric and Risk
From October 16
th
to 19
th
of 1980, a conference
on the subject of macroevolution was held at the Field Museum of
Natural History in Chicago, Illinois. Shortly thereafter—in the
November 21, 1980 issue of
Science
—an exciting report
on some events of the conference was published (Lewin 1980). The
report was entitled “Evolutionary Theory under Fire”, and
it prompted a cascade of responses in the Letters section of
Science
—an exchange of scientific correspondence that
continued for almost two decades. Whatever the motives behind the
headlining of the report, it is empirically evident that the chosen
title was inflammatory.
The February 21, 1981 issue of
Science
included no fewer than
5 separate contributions (in order of printing: Futuyma et al. 1981;
Templeton & Giddings 1981; Carson 1981; Olson 1981; Armstrong
& Drummond 1981). The February 4, 1983 issue of
Science
contained a letter by critics of PE (Schopf & Hoffman 1983) and a
reply (Gould 1983). In the March 11 issue of that same year both prior
parties were accused of prolonging a fruitless discussion of a
“philosophically intractable” and dubious
“pseudoquestion” (Grant 1983: 1170). In April, one
correspondent wrote in agreement with Grant (Schoch 1983) and another
chided him for failing “to explore and appreciate the latest
blooming in the desert of dogma” (Maderson 1983: 360). To put it
mildly, and purely descriptively: many of the responses elicited by
the original report were impassioned and emotive.
In the February 14, 1986 issue of
Science
, the original
reporter on the macroevolutionary conference fanned the flames with
another piece, one entitled “Punctuated Equilibrium is Now Old
Hat” (Lewin 1986). In March, Jeffrey Levinton registered an
ardent objection to Lewin’s characterization of the theory as
widely accepted, as well as to PE in general (Levinton 1986). In
April, Gould responded (Gould 1986), and in May, Robert Eckhardt
responded to Gould’s response (Eckhard 1986). Throughout these
exchanges and related ones, many interesting meta-scientific charges
were laid and lobbed. Questions of “where is the
evidence?” as well as accusations of dogma, religionism,
revisionism, sloganeering, and vagueness abounded.
So did references to creationism, specifically. The very first batch
of letters in response to Lewin’s initial piece included one
objecting strongly to the choice of title (Armstrong & Drummond
1981). The correspondents wrote that “this article is
undoubtedly destined to enter the out-of-context arsenal that has
become a mainstay of recent creationist literature” (Armstrong
& Drummond 1981: 774). Incidentally, the correspondents were
correct about this (e.g., Meyer 1994; Parker 2006).
And in the March 10, 1995 issue, a different journalist for
Science
published another piece, this one entitled “Did
Darwin Get It All Right?” (Kerr 1995). By May 5, a scientist had
written in to protest the use of such an inflammatory headline
(McInerney 1995), referencing Lewin’s original piece (from
1980). McInerney wrote that Lewin’s earlier piece had
“provided a gold mine for subsequent creationist
propaganda” (1995: 624). He bemoaned the fact that another such
headline had just been published by
Science
, and recommended
that “a journal representing some 130,000 scientists be a bit
more judicious in its choice of headlines” (1995: 624).
These references to a wider social context—the one in which such
ardent macroevolutionary debate is being held—raise interesting
issues that have perhaps been somewhat neglected by philosophers of
science (though see the entry on
the social dimensions of scientific knowledge
).
 Do the scientists involved in this dispute, and the
scientific journalists reporting on it, have a responsibility to
consider the (unintended yet foreseeable and potentially avoidable)
uses to which their headlines might be put (by creationists and other
parties)? Some scientific correspondents evidently think they do. And
if such responsibility exists, does it fall upon the shoulders of the
scientist
qua
scientist—or upon the shoulders of the
scientist
qua
citizen, or scientist
qua
educator?
Philosophers focusing on the relation between science and value have
done some relevant work on questions like these, usually while
focusing on other scientific domains—work which could be applied
to macroevolutionary instances and issues (e.g., Rudner 1953; Hempel
1960; Longino 1990; Douglas 2000, 2009; Kourany 2010).
These are not the only issues of provocative linguistic expression
awaiting further exploration by philosophers of macroevolution.
Questions of what it means to sit “at the high table”
(Maynard Smith 1984; Sepkoski 2014) or to “replay life’s
tape” (Gould 1989; Beatty 2006; Sepkoski 2016) are perhaps more
familiar to philosophers of biology, but still worth exploring.
6. Historical Contingency
Stephen Jay Gould (1989) famously argued that evolutionary history is
contingent. George Gaylord Simpson (1963) foreshadowed that claim when
he suggested that paleontology is a distinctively historical science
that seeks to understand “configurational change”. Gould
claimed that if we could rewind the tape of history to some point in
the deep past and play it back again, the outcome would probably be
different.
Gould’s thinking about contingency has had significant impacts
in both philosophy and biology. In philosophy, for instance, John
Beatty (1995) argued that the contingency of evolutionary history
implies that there are no distinctively biological laws, an argument
that served as a touchstone for much of the subsequent debate about
laws in biology (Brandon 1997; Mitchell 1997, 2000, 2002; Sober 1997;
Giere 1999; Shapiro 2000; Woodward 2000, 2001, 2004; Elgin 2003, 2006;
and Hamilton 2007; for important precursors to Beatty 1995, see Smart
1963; Ruse 1970; Cartwright 1983; van Fraassen 1989; and Rosenberg
1994). More recently, Beatty (2016) has argued that the contingency of
evolutionary history is closely connected to narrative modes of
explanation. His suggestion is that narrative explanations are
especially well suited to historically contingent series of events.
McConwell (2017) argues that the contingency of evolutionary history
explains why we should be pluralists about biological individuality.
In biology, on the other hand, Gould’s argument about
contingency, particularly his thought experiment concerning rewinding
and playing back the tape of history, helped to inspire research in
long-term experimental evolution (e.g., Travisano, Mangold, Bennett,
& Lenski 1995). In addition to fueling interest in understanding
the Cambrian explosion, Gould’s work also instigated something
of a backlash from other scientists convinced that selection-driven
convergence is the hallmark of evolutionary history (e.g., Conway
Morris 2003). This debate concerning contingency and convergence
sometimes also has theological overtones. Conway Morris has at least
hinted that he sees convergentism about evolution as cohering
especially well with theism. This contrasts with Gould’s
well-known view that science and religion should be regarded as
“non-overlapping magisteria” (Gould 1997).
There is some question about just what Gould meant by the term
‘contingency’. Some philosophers read him as meaning that
downstream outcomes are sensitive to small changes in upstream
conditions (Ben-Menahem 1997; Inkpen & Turner 2012). On this
reading, contingency comes in degrees, and in contrast with historical
in
sensitivity to changes in upstream conditions, which we
could think of as historical convergence or robustness. When, for
example, Sterelny (1995, crediting F. Jackson & Pettit 1992) talks
about “robust process explanations”, he means explanations
that show how an outcome would have resulted from a wide range of
upstream conditions.
Beatty (2006), however, has shown that there are two different senses
of ‘contingency’ in play in Gould’s work. In
addition to what Beatty calls contingency as causal
dependence—basically, sensitivity to initial
conditions—there is a second form of contingency that Beatty
initially called contingency as unpredictability, but now calls
contingency
per se
(Beatty 2016). These two senses of
contingency correspond with two versions of the famous thought
experiment that Gould (1989) deployed. Sometimes, Gould imagines
rewinding the tape of history, tweaking an upstream variable, and then
playing the tape back. On other occasions, he talks about playing the
tape back from the same initial conditions. Beatty (2016) thinks that
both senses of ‘contingency’ are important, and he takes
it that the second sense—contingency
per se
—must
commit us to some sort of causal indeterminism. On the other hand,
Turner (2011a) has tried to give an account of this second sense of
contingency that is neutral with respect to determinism. His
suggestion is that what Gould really cared about was random or
unbiased macroevolutionary sorting. Processes such as coin tosses, or
random genetic drift, can be random or unbiased (in a sense) without
violating causal determinism. One way to think about this is by
adopting a frequentist conception of probability: the outcome of a
coin toss could be causally determined by small-scale physical
influences, but the outcome is still random or unbiased in the sense
that over a long series of trials, the ratio of heads to tails will
approximate 50:50. This account is closely allied with
Sepkoski’s (2016) suggestion that Gould’s metaphor of
replaying the tape of history was rooted in his work on simulations of
macroevolution in the 1970s. Turner (2015) has also argued that there
is a connection between contingency, thus understood, and the notion
of a passive evolutionary trend.
McConwell and Currie (2017) have added further complexity to the
discussion by arguing that there is an important difference between
abstract,
source-independent
accounts of contingency and
source-dependent
accounts. The notion of sensitivity to
initial conditions is a good example of what they mean by a
source-independent account: it gives an abstract characterization of
historical or biological processes without saying what the source of
contingency is. Does the source have something to do with genetic
drift? With mutational ordering? Or something else entirely? McConwell
and Currie argue that in order to establish the autonomy of
macroevolutionary theory, a source-dependent account is required.
Some commentators have noted that Gould’s defense of
evolutionary contingency sits in tension with his arguments, in the
1970s and early 1980s, for a more “nomothetic”
paleobiology (e.g., Raup & Gould 1974). A more nomothetic
paleobiology would seem to place the emphasis on laws and
predictability. However, contingency is thought by some to mean that
there are no distinctively biological laws (Beatty 1995). Haufe (2015)
addresses this puzzle by arguing that Gould was interested in
developing a “nomothetic” science of macroevolution
involving generations at large spatial and (especially) temporal
scales, but that this is compatible with saying that contingency
reigns at other scales. One other larger theme that may help to unify
some of Gould’s thinking is his skepticism about the power of
natural selection, which is the classic example of a
micro-evolutionary process (see also Gould & Lewontin 1979). One
way to limit the importance of natural selection is to insist on the
autonomy of macroevolutionary theory, and to show that natural
selection is insufficient to explain certain larger scale patterns.
Another way is to insist that evolutionary history is contingent,
since one would expect selection to produce convergent outcomes.
Thus, philosophers have done a lot of work on challenging conceptual
questions about the various senses of ‘contingency’ and
their relationship to other macroevolutionary ideas. One problem
lurking in the background of this discussion is empirical: how can
scientists even tell whether evolutionary history is contingent or
(say) convergent? Conway Morris (2003) assembles a whole catalog of
examples of evolutionary convergence in an effort to provide
counterevidence against Gould’s contingency thesis. One
important issue here is to find a principled way of distinguishing
cases of convergent evolution (where unrelated lineages subject to
similar selection pressures evolve similar traits) from parallel
evolution (where lineages with similar traits to start with follow
similar evolutionary trajectories) (Pearce 2012). Another issue is
that one can multiply convergences by giving coarser-grained
descriptions of the traits in question—for example, by counting
agriculture in humans and some ant species as the same trait (Sterelny
2005). Powell & Mariscal (2015) argue that not all of the putative
examples of convergence really tell against the contingency thesis,
and they try to specify more clearly what would actually count as
evidence against contingency.
In developing his initial claim about evolutionary contingency, Gould
(1989) made much of the Burgess Shale fauna, exquisite Cambrian
fossils from western Canada first described by the American
paleontologist Charles Doolittle Walcott in the early 1900s. Gould was
writing in the wake of what some call the “first
reclassification” of the Burgess fossils, when work by British
paleontologist Harry Blackmore Whittington and students Derek Briggs
and Simon Conway Morris had placed many of the strange forms in their
own phyla, with the idea that each phylum represented a unique body
plan. Most of those Burgess phyla went extinct, but some (including a
likely ancestor of chordates) persisted. But what if that sorting had
happened differently? Since 1989, scientists Graham Budd, Allison
Daley, and others using cladistic methods of classification (which
were slow to be adopted by paleontologists) have reclassified the
Burgess fauna yet again, placing many of the strangest ones in stem
groups of existing clades (such as arthropods). So one further
philosophical question is whether and to what extent this change in
taxonomic practice matters to the argument that Gould tried to make
about contingency (Brysse 2008).
There is a closely related debate about the status of phyla. Some
cladists see phyla as being nothing terribly special. Like any higher
taxa, phyla must be monophyletic, but from a cladistic perspective
there is nothing about the taxonomic rank of phylum that has any
particular importance to macroevolutionary theory. Others have argued
that lower ranks like order and class are evolutionarily meaningful in
a way that phyla are not (e.g., Holman 1989). Gould (1989), however,
drawing upon German paleontological tradition, saw phyla as
corresponding to stable morphological body plans (or
Baupläne
). This connects closely with his argument about
contingency: if different Cambrian phyla had persisted, downstream
evolutionary history would have involved modification of totally
different body plans. Some scientists have recently tried to revive
the idea that there is something special about the role of phyla in
macroevolution (Levin, et al. 2016; though see Hejnol & Dunn
2016).
Finally, historical contingency is a counterfactual notion, and
although this issue has not gotten as much attention as it deserves,
there is a nascent philosophical literature on historical
counterfactuals (Tucker 2004: 227ff; Nolan 2013; Radick 2016; Zhao
2017 in Other Internet Resources). The debate about historical
contingency can be construed as a disagreement about the truth of
various historical counterfactuals. Gould claimed that if things in
the Cambrian had been slightly different, there would be no
vertebrates today, let alone humans, while other convergentists claim
that humanlike cognitive abilities, language, tool use, and sociality
would have evolved even if other things had been different in the
past—for example, if the non-avian dinosaurs had not gone
extinct.
7. Passive vs. Driven Trends
Paleontologists have long been interested in documenting and
explaining larger-scale evolutionary trends in the fossil record
(McShea 1998). Perhaps the classic example of a macroevolutionary
trend, and one that paleontologists have studied extensively, is
Cope’s rule of size increase. Paleontologists routinely
distinguish within-lineage trends (e.g., average size increase within
a single lineage) from among-lineage trends (e.g., increase in the
average size of mammals over the Cenozoic). The latter are
distinctively macro-level patterns. While it might be tempting to
think that trends such as evolutionary size increase are generally
attributable to natural selection, Stanley (1973) pointed out that
these trends could be merely statistical phenomena. Suppose that a
clade, such as mammals, starts out at or near a fixed lower boundary
on body size. And suppose that evolutionary size increases and
decreases are equally probable. As the clade evolves, the mean body
size might do a “random walk” away from the fixed
boundary—an idea that Gould (1996) later popularlized. Many
scientists also think of this as a passive diffusion model of
evolutionary change.
The notion of a passive trend is closely related to other themes of
macroevolutionary theory. Gould, in particular, was enthusiastic about
the possibility that Cope’s rule might be a passive trend. If
that were the case, then it would mean that evolutionary size increase
is not attributable to natural selection. What’s more, if we
explain size increase by supposing it to be a passive trend, then the
explanation need not reference any micro-level causes. The fixed
boundary in the state space could be maintained by developmental
constraints—another favorite theme of Gould’s. And
finally, a trend resulting from a random walk away from a fixed
boundary would not seem to be progressive at all. To the extent that
larger-scale evolutionary trends are passive, chance looks like a more
significant factor in evolutionary history, and selection looks like a
less significant one.
McShea (1994) gave one widely-cited formulation of the distinction
between passive and driven trends, and also suggested several
approaches for determining, empirically, whether a trend is passive or
driven. One such approach is the stable minimum test: track, say, the
body size of the smallest members of the clade. If that increases
steadily over time, it is a signal that the trend is driven.
Paleobiologists now routinely try to determine whether trends are
passive or driven, though this work can sometimes encounter
underdetermination issues (Turner 2009). Body size has received a lot
of empirical attention, in part because it is easy to estimate from
fragmentary fossil remains, and partly for the simple reason that it
is a trait that every animal has.
In addition to its role in the development of macroevolutionary theory
and its influence on scientific research, the passive/driven
distinction raises a number of philosophical issues. As noted already,
the notion of a passive trend links up with a traditional set of
questions about the role of chance or randomness in evolution
(Millstein 2000). Indeed, the passive/driven distinction looks a lot
like the distinction between random genetic drift and selection in
population genetics. Drift could be construed as a passive trend in
gene frequencies. Grantham (1999) argues that the notion of a passive
trend points toward a certain sort of explanatory pluralism: a trend
that is best explained as a stochastic phenomenon at the macro-level
could receive a more deterministic explanation at a lower level, and
those explanations need not conflict. Turner (2014) suggests that the
notion of a passive trend poses a challenge to popular interventionist
ideas about causal explanation. Explaining a trend by showing that it
is passive could turn out to be a non-causal explanatory strategy.
One issue that remains under-explored, philosophically, is how the
distinction between passive vs. driven larger-scale trends might
intersect with philosophical disagreements about whether neo-Darwinian
evolutionary theory is best understood as a causal theory (a view
given its canonical formulation by Sober 1984) or a statistical theory
(Matthen and Ariew 2002; Walsh, Lewens, and Ariew 2002). There may be
some question about whether it is best to understand the
passive/driven distinction as a distinction between trends generated
by different causal mechanisms, vs. a distinction between different
sorts of statistical phenomena.
8. The Zero-Force Evolutionary Law
Many paleobiologists have assumed that driven trends must be driven by
natural selection. For example, if body size increase is driven,
surely that means that larger body size has conferred some survival or
reproductive advantage (Hone & Benton 2005). McShea (2005) and
McShea and Brandon (2010) have forcefully challenged that assumption.
McShea (2005) argues that increase in structural complexity is a
driven trend, but one that need not be driven by selection. That is
because increasing structural complexity might just be the zero-force
condition for evolving systems, an idea that McShea and Brandon (2010)
develop in great detail. McShea and Brandon’s zero-force
evolutionary law—or
ZFEL
—has elicited critical
responses from other philosophers (Barrett, et al. 2012). Whereas
traditional evolutionary thinkers, from Darwin on down, assumed that
natural selection would have to explain complexity increase, McShea
and Brandon see complexity increase as the default expectation, and
they invoke selection to explain deviations from that default
expectation—such as cases of eye loss in cave-dwelling species.
They treat eye loss in cave dwellers as a case where natural selection
favors a reduction in structural complexity. Alternatively,
O’Malley, Wideman, & Ruiz-Trillo (2016) consider the
potentially wide-ranging and macroevolutionary role of simplification
in conferring “adaptive” advantage.
McShea and Brandon also argue that the
ZFEL
has the virtue of
giving a unified account of both micro- and macro-evolutionary
phenomena. They invoke the
ZFEL
to explain a wide variety of
different patterns, ranging from complexity increase in the history of
animal life, as represented by the fossil record, to increasing
genomic heterogeneity over time. Whatever one thinks about their claim
that the
ZFEL
is “biology’s first law”,
their project raises a question worth exploring: is it reasonable to
think that explanations of macroevolutionary patterns should take
fundamentally the same form as explanations of patterns at vastly
different spatiotemporal scales? How much does scale matter?
The
ZFEL
also raises some fundamental philosophical questions
about the structure of evolutionary theory. How, for example, should
we determine what counts as the default expectation, or zero-force
condition, for an evolutionary system (Gouvêa 2015)? Is there
any way to distinguish empirically between theories that disagree
about the default expectation? Is there even a fact of the matter
about what the default expectation should be? These questions about
default expectations for evolutionary systems may link up with larger
questions about the function of null hypotheses in scientific
reasoning. These questions about default assumptions in
macroevolutionary theory also prompt comparison with questions about,
for instance, neutral theory in molecular evolution (Kimura 1983) and
in community ecology (Hubbell 2006). For relevant philosophical
discussion, see e.g., Dietrich (1994); Bausman and Halina (2018).
9. Major Evolutionary Transitions
If one way to think about the larger picture of the history of life on
Earth is to focus on evolutionary trends (size increase, complexity
increase, etc.), another approach is to focus on major transitional
events in the history of life (Maynard Smith & Szathmáry
1995; Szathmáry & Maynard Smith 1995). The point of
departure for most work on major transitions has been Szathmáry
and Maynard Smith’s (1995: 228) list of game-changing
alterations in evolutionary history:
Replicating molecules to populations of molecules in
compartments
Unlinked replicators to chromosomes
RNA as gene and enzyme to DNA and protein (genetic code)
Prokaryotes to eukaryotes
Asexual clones to sexual populations
Protists to animals, plants, and fungi (cell differentiation)
Solitary individuals to colonies (non-reproductive castes)
Primate societies to human societies (language)
One of Maynard Smith and Szathmáry’s insights is that the
very mechanisms of evolution—the way evolution works—have
changed over the course of evolutionary history (Calcott &
Sterelny 2011).
One philosophical concern about the theory of major transitions is
that the original list was something of a mixed bag (McShea &
Simpson 2011). For example, some of the transitions, like the
evolution of eukaryotes and the evolution of multicellularity, seem to
involve jumps in part/whole complexity. But others, like the evolution
of sexual reproduction, do not. So it is not clear at all that these
are transitions of the same kind. Indeed, Maynard Smith and
Szathmáry suggest that the transitions have three features: (1)
changes in the way that information is stored and transmitted; (2) new
division of labor; and (3) individuals that could once reproduce
independently can no longer do so after the transition. Criterion (3),
in particular, links the issue of major transitions to the larger
debate about the nature of biological individuality. One potential
problem, though, is that not all the transitions on the original list
satisfy all three criteria. For example, the shift from primate
societies to human societies clearly involves (1) and (2), but not
(3). To complicate things further, Szathmáry (2015) revisits
the original list of transitions and proposes some changes.
Related to this worry that the major transitions do not comprise a
unified type of evolutionary event, some theorists (e.g.,
O’Malley 2014) argue that other significant events should be
count as major transitions. O’Malley & Powell (2016) think
that the biological oxygenation of Earth is a major transition, and
Currie (forthcoming) makes the case for treating mass extinctions as major
transitions.
A second philosophical concern is that Maynard Smith and
Szathmáry’s original idea looks a bit teleological, and
in a way that likely raises the hackles of some scientists and
philosophers (e.g., Dawkins 1986; Dennett 1995). The transitions in
Szathmáry and Maynard Smith’s (1995) list all seem like
necessary steps on the way to the evolution of humans, and cynically,
one might wonder if their relation to the later appearance of humans
is what makes the transitions “major”. Relatedly, one
might wonder if the idea of major transitions comes a little too close
to reviving pre-evolutionary thinking about the great chain of being.
This also connects with traditional questions about evolutionary
progress (Ruse 1997). While some of the concepts surveyed in this
entry—especially passive trends and historical
contingency—might seem like threats to the belief in
evolutionary progress, the theory of major transitions coheres well
with progressivist views about evolution.
In spite of these potential concerns, however, the major transitions
really are historical events that pose distinct explanatory
challenges. Arguably, our picture of macroevolution will not be
entirely complete without tackling some of those challenges.
It is noteworthy that neither Maynard Smith nor Szathmáry are
paleontologists, and so there may be a bit of a disconnect between
their original proposal and the way that many paleontologists have
come to think about major transitions. Several of the transitions from
the original list must have occurred way back in the deep past; the
fossil record is not likely to give us much insight into the origin of
eukaryotes, for instance. Molecular tools may be able to shed some
light on macroevolutionary queries about the deep past, however
(O’Malley 2016). And paleontologists sometimes take a much
broader (and looser) view of major transitions, such that any major
evolutionary novelty would count as a major transition. For instance,
the evolution of placentation in mammals, or the evolution of feathers
in archosaurs, might count as major transitions on this broader view.
Currie (forthcoming) draws a distinction between theory-driven
approaches to major transitions and phenomena-driven approaches.
Paleontologists tend to fall in the latter camp, since they usually
begin by thinking about major morphological or phenotypic changes that
show up in the fossil record.
10. The (Dis)unity of Macroevolutionary Theory
One significant and remaining challenge in the philosophy of
macroevolution is to work out how the various ideas about
macroevolution surveyed above may or may not fit together. What
exactly is the relationship between punctuated equilibria and species
selection? Or between PE and the major transitions? Or between species
selection and historical contingency? Or between contingency and the
major transitions? Do (some, all of) these ideas weave together to
form a unified picture of evolution at large scales? Or do they
represent something more like a heterogeneous grab bag of scientific
ideas that are more or less useful in different contexts? A further
question is how the relative (dis)unity of macroevolutionary theory
might bear on the longstanding question of how macroevolution is
related to microevolution.
Finally, the investigation of macroevolution challenges the purported
distinction between the experimental and historical sciences (Sober
1993; Cleland 2001). Investigation in this domain is historical and
often emphasizes the deep past, to be sure, but it also involves
theoretical and prospective modeling, making predictions about what
the models will or will not find, making predictions about what
paleontologists will or will not find, running bottle and other kinds
of experiments, simulations, and more. The scientific study of
macroevolution is a philosophically rich and challenging field with
many deposits to mine.
Bibliography
Armstrong, Joseph E. and Boyce A. Drummond, 1981,
“Macroevolution Conference”,
Science
, 211(4484):
774–774. doi:10.1126/science.211.4484.774
Arthur, Wallace, 2004,
Biased Embryos and Evolution
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511606830
Barrett, Martin, Hayley Clatterbuck, Michael Goldsby, Casey
Helgeson, Brian McLoone, Trevor Pearce, Elliott Sober, Reuben Stern,
and Naftali Weinberger, 2012, “Puzzles for ZFEL, McShea and
Brandon’s Zero Force Evolutionary Law”,
Biology &
Philosophy
, 27(5): 723–735. doi:10.1007/s10539-012-9321-7
Bausman, William and Marta Halina, 2018, “Not Null Enough:
Pseudo-Null Hypotheses in Community Ecology and Comparative
Psychology”,
Biology & Philosophy
, 33(3–4): 30.
doi:10.1007/s10539-018-9640-4
Beatty, John, 1995, “The Evolutionary Contingency
Thesis”, in Geron Wolters and James G. Lennox (eds.),
Concepts, Theories, and Rationality in the Biological
Sciences
, Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press, pp.
45–81.
–––, 1997, “Why Do Biologists Argue like
They Do?”,
Philosophy of Science
, 64(supplement):
S432–S443. doi:10.1086/392620
–––, 2006, “Replaying Life’s
Tape:”,
Journal of Philosophy
, 103(7): 336–362.
doi:10.5840/jphil2006103716
–––, 2016, “What Are Narratives Good
For?”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C:
Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 58: 33–40. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2015.12.016
Ben‐Menahem, Yemima, 1997, “Historical Contingency”,
Ratio
, 10(2): 99–107. doi:10.1111/1467-9329.00032
Bokulich, Alisa, forthcoming, “Using Models to Correct Data:
Paleodiversity and the Fossil Record”,
Synthese
,
first online 29 May 2018. doi:10.1007/s11229-018-1820-x
Boorman, Scott A. and Paul R. Levitt, 1973, “Group Selection
on the Boundary of a Stable Population”,
Theoretical
Population Biology
, 4(1): 85–128.
doi:10.1016/0040-5809(73)90007-5
Bouchard, Frédéric and Alex Rosenberg, 2004,
“Fitness, Probability and the Principles of Natural
Selection”,
The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 55(4): 693–712. doi:10.1093/bjps/55.4.693
Brandon, Robert N., 1988, “The Levels of Selection: A
Hierarchy of Interactors”, in
The Role of Behavior in
Evolution
, H.C. Plotkin (ed.), Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, pp.
51–71.
–––, 1990,
Adaptation and Environment
,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
–––, 1997, “Does Biology Have Laws? The
Experimental Evidence”,
Philosophy of Science
,
64(supplement): S444–S457. doi:10.1086/392621
–––, 2006, “The Principle of Drift:
Biology’s First Law”,
Journal of Philosophy
,
103(7): 319–335. doi:10.5840/jphil2006103723
Brysse, Keynyn, 2008, “From Weird Wonders to Stem Lineages:
The Second Reclassification of the Burgess Shale Fauna”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in
History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
,
39(3): 298–313. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2008.06.004
Buss, Leo W., 1988,
The Evolution of Individuality
,
Princeton: Princeton University Press. doi:10.1515/9781400858712
Calcott, Brett and Kim Sterelny (eds), 2011,
The Major
Transitions in Evolution Revisited
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
doi:10.7551/mitpress/9780262015240.001.0001
Carson, Hampton L., 1981, “Macroevolution Conference”,
Science
, 211(4484): 773–773.
doi:10.1126/science.211.4484.773
Cartwright, Nancy, 1983,
How the Laws of Physics Lie
, New
York: Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/0198247044.001.0001
Clarke, Ellen, 2010, “The Problem of Biological
Individuality”,
Biological Theory
, 5(4): 312–325.
doi:10.1162/BIOT_a_00068
–––, 2013, “The Multiple Realizability of
Biological Individuals”:,
Journal of Philosophy
,
110(8): 413–435. doi:10.5840/jphil2013110817
Cleland, Carol E., 2001, “Historical Science, Experimental
Science, and the Scientific Method”,
Geology
, 29(11):
987–990.
Conway Morris, Simon, 2003,
Life’s Solution: Inevitable
Humans in a Lonely Universe
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511535499
Coyne, J. A., B. Charlesworth;, S. F. Elena, V. S. Cooper, and R.
E. Lenski, 1996, “Mechanisms of Punctuated Evolution”,
Science
, 274(5293): 1748–1750.
doi:10.1126/science.274.5293.1748
Coyne, Jerry A., and Brian Charlesworth, 1997, “On
Punctuated Equilibria”,
Science
, 276(5311):
339–341. doi:10.1126/science.276.5311.337c
Cracraft, Joel, 1985, “Species Selection, Macroevolutionary
Analysis, and the ‘Hierarchical Theory’ of
Evolution”,
Systematic Zoology
, 34(2): 222–229.
doi:10.2307/sysbio/34.2.222
Currie, Adrian, forthcoming, “Mass Extinctions as Major
Transitions”,
Biology & Philosophy
, first online 03
April 2019, 34(2). doi:10.1007/s10539-019-9676-0
Currie, Adrian and Derek Turner, 2017, “The Missing Fossils
Matter as Much as the Ones We Have Found”,
Aeon
, 19
January 2017,
available online
.
Darwin, Charles, 1859 [1964],
On the Origin of Species: A
Facsimile
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
–––, 1871,
The Descent of Man, and Selection
in Relation to Sex
, London: John Murray.
Dawkins, Richard, 1976,
The Selfish Gene
, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
–––, 1986,
The Blind Watchmaker: Why the
Evidence of Evolution Reveals a Universe without Design
, London:
Norton.
Dennett, Daniel C., 1995,
Darwin’s Dangerous Idea
,
New York: Simon and Schuster.
Dietrich, Michael R., 1994, “The Origins of the Neutral
Theory of Molecular Evolution”,
Journal of the History of
Biology
, 27(1): 21–59. doi:10.1007/BF01058626
Douglas, Heather, 2000, “Inductive Risk and Values in
Science”,
Philosophy of Science
, 67(4): 559–579.
doi:10.1086/392855
–––, 2009,
Science, Policy, and the
Value-Free Ideal
, Pittsburgh, PA: Pittsburgh University
Press.
Eckhard, Robert B., 1986, “Punctuated Equilibrium: From the
Other Side”,
Science
, 232(4753): 920–920.
doi:10.1126/science.232.4753.920
Eldredge, Niles, 1971, “The Allopatric Model and Phylogeny
in Paleozoic Invertebrates”,
Evolution
, 25(1):
156–167. doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.1971.tb01868.x
–––, 1985,
Unfinished Synthesis: Biological
Hierarchies and Modern Evolutionary Thought
, New York: Oxford
University Press.
Eldredge, Niles and Stephen Jay Gould, 1972, “Punctuated
Equilibria: An Alternative to Phyletic Gradualism”, in
Models in Paleobiology
, Thomas J.M. Schopf (ed.), San
Francisco, CA: Freeman, Cooper, & Co., pp. 85–115.
–––, 1988, “Punctuated Equilibrium
Prevails”,
Nature
, 332(6161): 211–212.
doi:10.1038/332211b0
Eldredge, Niles, Telmo Pievani, Emanuele Serrelli, and Ilya
Tëmkin (eds.), 2016,
Evolutionary Theory: A Hierarchical
Perspective
, Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Elgin, Mehmet, 2003, “Biology and
A Priori
Laws”,
Philosophy of Science
, 70(5): 1380–1389.
doi:10.1086/377415
–––, 2006, “There May Be Strict Empirical
Laws in Biology, after All”,
Biology & Philosophy
,
21(1): 119–134. doi:10.1007/s10539-005-3177-z
Ereshefsky, Marc, 1991, “Species, Higher Taxa, and the Units
of Evolution”,
Philosophy of Science
, 58(1): 84–101.
doi:10.1086/289600
Endler, John A., 1986,
Natural Selection in the Wild
,
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Estes, Suzanne and Stevan J. Arnold, 2007, “Resolving the
Paradox of Stasis: Models with Stabilizing Selection Explain
Evolutionary Divergence on All Timescales”,
The American
Naturalist
, 169(2): 227–244. doi:10.1086/510633
Filler, Joshua, 2009, “Newtonian Forces and Evolutionary
Biology: A Problem and Solution for Extending the Force
Interpretation”,
Philosophy of Science
, 76(5):
774–783. doi:10.1086/605799
Fisher, R.A., 1929,
The Genetical Theory of Natural
Selection
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Fodor, J. A., 1974, “Special Sciences (or: The Disunity of
Science as a Working Hypothesis)”,
Synthese
, 28(2):
97–115. doi:10.1007/BF00485230
Franklin, Ian and R. C. Lewontin, 1970, “Is the Gene the
Unit of Selection?”,
Genetics
, 65(4): 707–734.
Futuyma, D. J., R. C. Lewontin, G. C. Mayer, J. Seger, and J. W.
Stubblefield, 1981, “Macroevolution Conference”,
Science
, 211(4484): 770–770.
doi:10.1126/science.211.4484.770
Ghiselin, Michael T., 1974, “A Radical Solution to the
Species Problem”,
Systematic Zoology
, 23(4): 536–544.
doi:10.2307/2412471
Giere, Ronald N., 1999,
Science Without Laws
, Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press.
Glennan, Stuart, 2002, “Contextual Unanimity and the Units
of Selection Problem”,
Philosophy of Science
, 69(1):
118–137. doi:10.1086/338944
Godfrey-Smith, Peter, 2000, “The Replicator in
Retrospect”,
Biology & Philosophy
, 15(3):
403–423. doi:10.1023/A:1006704301415
–––, 2007, “Conditions for Evolution by
Natural Selection”:,
Journal of Philosophy
, 104(10):
489–516. doi:10.5840/jphil2007104103
Godfrey-Smith, Peter and R. C. Lewontin, 1993, “The
Dimensions of Selection”,
Philosophy of Science
, 60(3):
373–395. doi:10.1086/289742
Goldschmidt, Richard, 1940,
The Material Basis of
Evolution
, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.
Gould, Stephen Jay, 1977, “The Return of Hopeful
Monsters”,
Natural History
, 86: 22–30.
–––, 1980a, “Caring Groups and Selfish
Genes”, in
The Panda’s Thumb: More Reflections on
Natural History
, New York, NY: Norton, pp. 85–92.
–––, 1980b, “Is a New and General Theory
of Evolution Emerging?”,
Paleobiology
, 6(1): 119–130.
doi:10.1017/S0094837300012549
–––, 1982, “Darwinism and the Expansion of
Evolutionary Theory”,
Science
, 216(4544): 380–387.
doi:10.1126/science.7041256
–––, 1983, “Punctuated Equilibrium and the
Fossil Record”,
Science
, 219(4584): 439–440.
doi:10.1126/science.219.4584.439
–––, 1986, “Punctuated Equilibrium:
Empirical Response”,
Science
, 232(4749): 439.
doi:10.1126/science.232.4749.439
–––, 1989,
Wonderful Life: The Burgess Shale
and the Nature of History
, New York: W.W. Norton.
–––, 1996,
Full House: The Spread of
Excellence from Plato to Darwin
, New York: W.W. Norton.
–––, 1997, “Nonoverlapping
Magisteria”,
Natural History
, 106: 16–22.
–––, 2002,
The Structure of Evolutionary
Theory
, Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Gould, Stephen Jay and Niles Eldredge, 1977, “Punctuated
Equilibria: The Tempo and Mode of Evolution Reconsidered”,
Paleobiology
, 3(2): 115–151.
doi:10.1017/S0094837300005224
–––, 1983, “Darwin’s
Gradualism”,
Systematic Zoology
, 32(4): 444–445.
doi:10.1093/sysbio/32.4.444
–––, 1986, “Punctuated Equilibrium at the
Third Stage”,
Systematic Zoology
, 35(1): 143–148.
doi:10.1093/sysbio/35.1.143
–––, 1993, “Punctuated Equilibrium Comes
of Age”,
Nature
, 366(6452): 223–227.
doi:10.1038/366223a0
Gould, Stephen Jay and R. C. Lewontin, 1979, “The Spandrels
of San Marco and the Panglossian Paradigm: A Critique of the
Adaptationist Programme”,
Proceedings of the Royal Society
of London. Series B. Biological Sciences
, 205(1161): 581–598.
doi:10.1098/rspb.1979.0086
Gould, Stephen Jay, David M. Raup, J. John Sepkoski, Thomas J. M.
Schopf, and Daniel S. Simberloff, 1977, “The Shape of Evolution:
A Comparison of Real and Random Clades”,
Paleobiology
,
3(1): 23–40. doi:10.1017/S009483730000508X
Gouvêa, Devin Y., 2015, “Explanation and the
Evolutionary First Law(s)”,
Philosophy of Science
,
82(3): 363–382. doi:10.1086/681603
Grant, Richard E., 1983, “Evolution: A Cyclical
Argument?”,
Science
, 219(4589): 1170–1170.
doi:10.1126/science.219.4589.1170-a
Grantham, Todd A., 1995, “Hierarchical Approaches to
Macroevolution: Recent Work on Species Selection and the ‘Effect
Hypothesis’”,
Annual Review of Ecology and
Systematics
, 26: 301–321.
doi:10.1146/annurev.es.26.110195.001505
–––, 1999, “Explanatory Pluralism in
Paleobiology”,
Philosophy of Science
, 66(supplement):
S223–S236. doi:10.1086/392727
–––, 2007, “Is Macroevolution More than
Successive Rounds of Microevolution?”,
Palaeontology
,
50(1): 75–85. doi:10.1111/j.1475-4983.2006.00603.x
Griesemer, James, 2000, “Development, Culture, and the Units
of Inheritance”,
Philosophy of Science
, 67(supplement):
S348–S368. doi:10.1086/392831
Griffiths, Paul E. and Russell D. Gray, 1994, “Developmental
Systems and Evolutionary Explanation”:,
Journal of
Philosophy
, 91(6): 277–304. doi:10.2307/2940982
–––, 1997, “Replicator II—Judgement
Day”,
Biology & Philosophy
, 12(4): 471–492.
doi:10.1023/A:1006551516090
Haldane, J.B.S, 1932,
The Causes of Evolution
, London:
Longmans, Green & Co.
Hamilton, Andrew, 2007, “Laws of Biology, Laws of Nature:
Problems and (Dis)Solutions”,
Philosophy Compass
, 2(3):
592–610. doi:10.1111/j.1747-9991.2007.00087.x
Hamilton, W. D., 1963, “The Evolution of Altruistic
Behavior”,
The American Naturalist
, 97(896): 354–356.
doi:10.1086/497114
Harshman, Lawrence G and Ary A Hoffmann, 2000, “Laboratory
Selection Experiments Using Drosophila: What Do They Really Tell
Us?”,
Trends in Ecology & Evolution
, 15(1):
32–36. doi:10.1016/S0169-5347(99)01756-5
Haufe, Chris, 2015, “Gould’s Laws”,
Philosophy of Science
, 82(1): 1–20. doi:10.1086/678979
Hejnol, Andreas and Casey W. Dunn, 2016, “Animal Evolution:
Are Phyla Real?”,
Current Biology
, 26(10): R424–R426.
doi:10.1016/j.cub.2016.03.058
Hempel, Carl G., 1960, “Science and Human Values”, in
Social Control in a Free Society
, Robert E. Spiller (ed.),
Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press, pp.
39–64.
Hendry, Andrew, 2007, “The Elvis Paradox”,
Nature
, 446(7132): 147–149. doi:10.1038/446147a
Holman, Eric W., 1989, “Some Evolutionary Correlates of
Higher Taxa”,
Paleobiology
, 15(4): 357–363.
doi:10.1017/S0094837300009556
Hone, David W.E. and Michael J. Benton, 2005, “The Evolution
of Large Size: How Does Cope’s Rule Work?”,
Trends in
Ecology & Evolution
, 20(1): 4–6.
doi:10.1016/j.tree.2004.10.012
Hoppitt, William and Kevin N. Laland, 2013,
Social Learning:
An Introduction to Mechanisms, Methods, and Models
, Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Hubbell, Stephen P., 2006, “Neutral Theory and the Evolution
of Ecological Equivalence”,
Ecology
, 87(6):
1387–1398. doi:10.1890/0012-9658(2006)87[1387:NTATEO]2.0.CO;2
Hull, David L., 1976, “Are Species Really
Individuals?”,
Systematic Zoology
, 25(2): 174.
doi:10.2307/2412744
–––, 1978, “A Matter of
Individuality”,
Philosophy of Science
, 45(3):
335–360. doi:10.1086/288811
–––, 1980, “Individuality and
Selection”,
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
,
11: 311–332. doi:10.1146/annurev.es.11.110180.001523
Hunt, Gene, 2007, “The Relative Importance of Directional
Change, Random Walks, and Stasis in the Evolution of Fossil
Lineages”,
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences
, 104(47): 18404–18408.
doi:10.1073/pnas.0704088104
Inkpen, Rob and Derek Turner, 2012, “The Topography of
Historical Contingency”,
Journal of the Philosophy of
History
, 6(1): 1–19. doi:10.1163/187226312X625573
Jablonka, Eva and Marion J. Lamb, 2005,
Evolution in Four
Dimensions: Genetic, Epigenetic, Behavioral, and Symbolic Variation in
the History of Life
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jablonski, David, 1987, “Heritability at the Species Level:
Analysis of Geographic Ranges of Cretaceous Mollusks”,
Science
, 238(4825): 360–363.
doi:10.1126/science.238.4825.360
–––, 2008, “Species Selection: Theory and
Data”,
Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and
Systematics
, 39: 501–524.
doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.39.110707.173510
Jackson, Frank and Philip Pettit, 1992, “In Defense of
Explanatory Ecumenism”,
Economics and Philosophy
, 8(1):
1–21. doi:10.1017/S0266267100000468
Jackson, Jeremy B.C. and Alan H. Cheetham, 1999, “Tempo and
Mode of Speciation in the Sea”,
Trends in Ecology &
Evolution
, 14(2): 72–77. doi:10.1016/S0169-5347(98)01504-3
Kaplan, Jonathan Michael, 2009, “The Paradox of Stasis and
the Nature of Explanations in Evolutionary Biology”,
Philosophy of Science
, 76(5): 797–808.
doi:10.1086/605803
Kerr, R.A., 1995, “Did Darwin Get It All Right?”,
Science
, 267(5203): 1421–1422.
doi:10.1126/science.7878460
Kimura, Motoo, 1983,
The Neutral Theory of Molecular
Evolution
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511623486
Kitcher, Philip, 1984, “1953 and All That. A Tale of Two
Sciences”,
The Philosophical Review
, 93(3): 335.
doi:10.2307/2184541
Kitcher, Philip, Kim Sterelny, and C. Kenneth Waters, 1990,
“The Illusory Riches of Sober’s Monism”,
The
Journal of Philosophy
, 87(3): 158. doi:10.2307/2026634
Kourany, Janet A., 2010,
Philosophy of Science after
Feminism
, New York: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199732623.001.0001
Kuhn, Thomas S., 1962,
The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions
, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Laland, Kevin, Tobias Uller, Marc Feldman, Kim Sterelny, Gerd B.
Müller, Armin Moczek, Eva Jablonka, and John Odling-Smee, 2014,
“Does Evolutionary Theory Need a Rethink? Yes, Urgently”,
Nature
, 514(7521): 161–164. doi:10.1038/514161a
LaPorte, Joseph, 2004,
Natural Kinds and Conceptual
Change
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511527319
Lenski, R. E. and M. Travisano, 1994, “Dynamics of
Adaptation and Diversification: A 10,000-Generation Experiment with
Bacterial Populations”,
Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences
, 91(15): 6808–6814.
doi:10.1073/pnas.91.15.6808
Levin, Bruce R. and William L. Kilmer, 1974, “Interdemic
Selection and the Evolution of Altruism: A Computer Simulation
Study”,
Evolution
, 28(4): 527–545.
doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.1974.tb00787.x
Levin, Michal, Leon Anavy, Alison G. Cole, Eitan Winter, Natalia
Mostov, Sally Khair, Naftalie Senderovich, et al., 2016, “The
Mid-Developmental Transition and the Evolution of Animal Body
Plans”,
Nature
, 531(7596): 637–641.
doi:10.1038/nature16994
Levinton, Jeffrey S., 1983, “Stasis in Progress: The
Empirical Basis of Macroevolution”,
Annual Review of Ecology
and Systematics
, 14: 103–137.
doi:10.1146/annurev.es.14.110183.000535
–––, 1986, “Punctuated Equilibrium”,
Science
, 231(4745): 1490. doi:10.1126/science.3952491
Lewin, Roger, 1980, “Evolutionary Theory under Fire”,
Science
, 210(4472): 883–887.
doi:10.1126/science.6107993
–––, 1986, “Punctuated Equilibrium Is Now
Old Hat”,
Science
, 231(4739): 672–673.
doi:10.1126/science.231.4739.672
Lewontin, R.C., 1970, “The Units of Selection”,
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
, 1: 1–18.
doi:10.1146/annurev.es.01.110170.000245
–––, 1991,
Biology as Ideology: The Doctrine
of DNA
, New York, NY: Harper Collins.
Lidgard, Scott and Melanie Hopkins, 2015, “Stasis”,
Oxford Bibliographies in Evolutionary Biology
, Douglas J.
Futuyma (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/obo/9780199941728-0067
Lidgard, Scott and Alan C Love, 2018, “Rethinking Living
Fossils”,
BioScience
, 68(10): 760–770.
doi:10.1093/biosci/biy084
Lloyd, Elisabeth A., 1988,
The Structure and Confirmation of
Evolutionary Theory
, New York: Greenwood Press.
–––, 2005, “Why the Gene Will Not
Return”,
Philosophy of Science
, 72(2): 287–310.

doi:10.1086/432425
Longino, Helen E., 1990,
Science as Social Knowledge: Values
and Objectivity in Scientific Inquiry
, Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Maderson, Paul F. A., 1983, “Evolution Debate”,
Science
, 220(4595): 360.
doi:10.1126/science.220.4595.360-c
Matthen, Mohan and André Ariew, 2002, “Two Ways of
Thinking About Fitness and Natural Selection”:,
Journal of
Philosophy
, 99(2): 55–83. doi:10.2307/3655552
Maynard Smith, John, 1964, “Group Selection and Kin
Selection”,
Nature
, 201(4924): 1145–1147.
doi:10.1038/2011145a0
–––, 1984, “Evolution: Palaeontology at
the High Table”,
Nature
, 309(5967): 401–402.
doi:10.1038/309401a0
Maynard Smith, John and Eörs Szathmáry, 1995,
The
Major Transitions in Evolution
, Oxford: W.H. Freeman and Co.
Mayr, Ernst, 1940, “Speciation Phenomena in Birds”,
The American Naturalist
, 74(752): 249–278.
doi:10.1086/280892
–––, 1942,
Systematics and the Origin of
Species
, New York, NY: Columbia University Press.
–––, 1963,
Animal Species and
Evolution
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
–––, 2001,
What Evolution Is
, New York,
NY: Basic Books.
McConwell, Alison K., 2017, “Contingency and Individuality:
A Plurality of Evolutionary Individuality Types”,
Philosophy
of Science
, 84(5): 1104–1116. doi:10.1086/694010
McConwell, Alison K. and Adrian Currie, 2017, “Gouldian
Arguments and the Sources of Contingency”,
Biology &
Philosophy
, 32(2): 243–261. doi:10.1007/s10539-016-9556-9
McInerney, Joseph D., 1995, “Darwin in the Headlines”,
Science
, 268(5211): 624. doi:10.1126/science.7732363
McShea, Daniel W., 1994, “Mechanisms of Large-Scale
Evolutionary Trends”,
Evolution
, 48(6): 1747–1763.
doi:10.1111/j.1558-5646.1994.tb02211.x
–––, 1998, “Possible Largest-Scale Trends
in Organismal Evolution: Eight ‘Live Hypotheses’”,
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics
, 29: 293–318.
doi:10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.29.1.293
–––, 2005, “The Evolution of Complexity
without Natural Selection, a Possible Large-Scale Trend of the Fourth
Kind”,
Paleobiology
, 31(S2): 146–156.
doi:10.1666/0094-8373(2005)031[0146:TEOCWN]2.0.CO;2
McShea, Daniel W. and Robert N. Brandon, 2010,
Biology’s
First Law: The Tendency for Diversity and Complexity to Increase in
Evolutionary Systems
, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago
Press.
McShea, Daniel W. and Carl Simpson, 2011, “The Miscellaneous
Transitions in Evolution”, in Calcott and Sterelny 2011:
19–34. doi:10.7551/mitpress/9780262015240.003.0002
Meyer, Stephen C., 1994, “The Methodological Equivalence of
Design and Descent: Can There be a Scientific Theory of
Creation?”, in
The Creation Hypothesis
, J.P. Moreland
(ed.), Downers Grove, IL: InterVarsity Press, pp.
67­–112.
Millstein, Roberta L., 2000, “Chance and
Macroevolution”,
Philosophy of Science
, 67(4):
603–624. doi:10.1086/392857
–––, 2006, “Natural Selection as a
Population-Level Causal Process”,
The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science
, 57(4): 627–653.
doi:10.1093/bjps/axl025
Mitchell, Sandra D., 1997, “Pragmatic Laws”,
Philosophy of Science
, 64(supplement): S468–S479.
doi:10.1086/392623
–––, 2000, “Dimensions of Scientific
Law”,
Philosophy of Science
, 67(2): 242–265.
doi:10.1086/392774
–––, 2002, “
Ceteris
Paribus
—An Inadequate Representation For Biological
Contingency”,
Erkenntnis
, 57(3): 329–350.
doi:10.1023/A:1021530311109
Nanay, Bence, 2002, “The Return of the Replicator: What Is
Philosophically Significant in a General Account of Replication and
Selection?”,
Biology & Philosophy
, 17(1):
109–121. doi:10.1023/A:1012932516775
Nolan, Daniel, 2013, “Why Historians (and Everyone Else)
Should Care about Counterfactuals”,
Philosophical
Studies
, 163(2): 317–335. doi:10.1007/s11098-011-9817-z
Odling-Smee, F. John, Kevin N. Laland, and Marcus W. Feldman,
2003,
Niche Construction: The Neglected Process in Evolution
,
(Monographs in Population Biology 37), Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Okasha, Samir, 2006,
Evolution and the Levels of
Selection
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199267972.001.0001
Olson, Everett C., 1981, “Macroevolution Conference”,
Science
, 211(4484): 773–774.
doi:10.1126/science.211.4484.773-a
O’Malley, Maureen A., 2014,
Philosophy of
Microbiology
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139162524
–––, 2016, “Histories of Molecules:
Reconciling the Past”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part A
, 55: 69–83. doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2015.09.002
O’Malley, Maureen A. and Russell Powell, 2016, “Major
Problems in Evolutionary Transitions: How a Metabolic Perspective Can
Enrich Our Understanding of Macroevolution”,
Biology &
Philosophy
, 31(2): 159–189. doi:10.1007/s10539-015-9513-z
O’Malley, Maureen A., Jeremy G. Wideman, and Iñaki
Ruiz-Trillo, 2016, “Losing Complexity: The Role of
Simplification in Macroevolution”,
Trends in Ecology &
Evolution
, 31(8): 608–621. doi:10.1016/j.tree.2016.04.004
Oppenheim, Paul and Hilary Putnam, 1958, “Unity of Science
as a Working Hypothesis”, in
Concepts, Theories, and the
Mind-Body Problem
, Herbert Feigl, Michael Scriven, and Grover
Maxwell (eds.), (Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 2),
University of Minnesota Press.
 [
Oppenheim and Putname 1958 available online
]
Parker, Gary, 2006,
Creation: Facts of Life: How Real Science
Reveals the Hand of God
, revised edition, Green Forest, AR:
Master Books.
Pearce, Trevor, 2012, “Convergence and Parallelism in
Evolution: A Neo-Gouldian Account”,
The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science
, 63(2): 429–448.
doi:10.1093/bjps/axr046
Pigliucci, Massimo and Leonard Finkelman, 2014, “The
Extended (Evolutionary) Synthesis Debate: Where Science Meets
Philosophy”,
BioScience
, 64(6): 511–516.
doi:10.1093/biosci/biu062
Pigliucci, Massimo and Gerd B. Müller (eds.), 2010,
Evolution: The Extended Synthesis
, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Popper, Karl R., 1974, “Replies to My Critics”, in
P.A. Schilpp (ed.),
The Philosophy of Karl Popper
, La Salle,
IL: Open Court, pp. 961–1197.
Powell, Russell and Carlos Mariscal, 2015, “Convergent
Evolution as Natural Experiment: The Tape of Life Reconsidered”,
Interface Focus
, 5(6): 20150040.
doi:10.1098/rsfs.2015.0040
Price, Trevor D., Peter R. Grant, H. Lisle Gibbs, and Peter T.
Boag, 1984, “Recurrent Patterns of Natural Selection in a
Population of Darwin’s Finches”,
Nature
,
309(5971): 787–789. doi:10.1038/309787a0
Radick, Gregory, 2016, “Presidential Address: Experimenting
with the Scientific Past”,
The British Journal for the
History of Science
, 49(2): 153–172.
doi:10.1017/S0007087416000339
Raup, D. M. and S. J. Gould, 1974, “Stochastic Simulation
and Evolution of Morphology-Towards a Nomothetic Paleontology”,
Systematic Zoology
, 23(3): 305–322.
doi:10.1093/sysbio/23.3.305
Rosenberg, Alex, 1994,
Instrumental Biology, or the Disunity
of Science
, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
–––, 1997, “Reductionism Redux: Computing
the Embryo”,
Biology & Philosophy
, 12(4):
445–470. doi:10.1023/A:1006574719901
Rudner, Richard, 1953, “The Scientist
Qua
Scientist
Makes Value Judgments”,
Philosophy of Science
, 20(1):
1–6. doi:10.1086/287231
Ruse, Michael E., 1970, “Are There Laws in Biology?”,
Australasian Journal of Philosophy
, 48(2): 234–246.
doi:10.1080/00048407012341201
–––, 1997,
Monad to Man: The Concept of
Progress in Evolutionary Biology
, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Sarkar, Sahotra, 1992, “Models of Reduction and Categories
of Reductionism”,
Synthese
, 91(3): 167–194.
doi:10.1007/BF00413566
Schmalhausen, Ivan I., 1949,
Factors of Evolution: The Theory
of Stabilizing Selection
, Philadelphia, PA: Blakiston.
Schoch, Robert M., 1983, “Evolution Debate”,
Science
, 220(4595): 360.
doi:10.1126/science.220.4595.360-b
Schopf, Thomas J. M. and Anton Hoffman, 1983, “Punctuated
Equilibrium and the Fossil Record”,
Science
, 219(4584):
438–439. doi:10.1126/science.219.4584.438
Sepkoski, David, 2012,
Rereading the Fossil Record: The Growth
of Paleobiology as an Evolutionary Discipline
, Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press.
–––, 2014, “Paleontology at the
‘High Table’? Popularization and Disciplinary Status in
Recent Paleontology”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and
Biomedical Sciences
, 45: 133–138.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2013.11.006
–––, 2016, “‘Replaying Life’s
Tape’: Simulations, Metaphors, and Historicity in Stephen Jay
Gould’s View of Life”,
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of
Biological and Biomedical Sciences
, 58: 73–81.
doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2015.12.009
Sepkoski, David and Michael Ruse (eds), 2009,
The
Paleobiological Revolution: Essays on the Growth of Modern
Palaeontology
, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Shapiro, Lawrence A., 2000, “Multiple Realizations”,
The Journal of Philosophy
, 97(12): 635–654.
doi:10.2307/2678460
Sheldon, Peter R., 1996, “Plus ça Change – a Model
for Stasis and Evolution in Different Environments”,
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology
,
127(1–4): 209–227. doi:10.1016/S0031-0182(96)00096-X
Simpson, George Gaylord, 1963, “Historical Science”,
in Claude C. Albritton (ed.),
The Fabric of Geology
, Reading,
MA: Addison-Wesley, pp. 24–48.
 [
Simpson 1963 available online
]
–––, 1970, “Uniformitarianism. An Inquiry
into Principle, Theory, and Method in Geohistory and
Biohistory”, in
Essays in Evolution and Genetics in Honor of
Theodosius Dobzhansky
, Max K. Hecht and William C. Steere (eds.),
Boston, MA: Springer US, 43–96. doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-9585-4_2
Smart, J.J.C., 1963,
Philosophy and Scientific Realism
,
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Sober, Elliott, 1984,
The Nature of Selection: Evolutionary
Theory in Philosophical Focus
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
–––, 1990, “The Poverty of Pluralism: A
Reply to Sterelny and Kitcher”,
The Journal of
Philosophy
, 87(3): 151–158. doi:10.2307/2026633
–––, 1993,
Philosophy of Biology
,
Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
–––, 1997, “Two Outbreaks of Lawlessness
in Recent Philosophy of Biology”,
Philosophy of
Science
, 64(supplement): S458–S467. doi:10.1086/392622
–––, 2009, “Absence of Evidence and
Evidence of Absence: Evidential Transitivity in Connection with
Fossils, Fishing, Fine-Tuning, and Firing Squads”,
Philosophical Studies
, 143(1): 63–90.
doi:10.1007/s11098-008-9315-0
Sober, Elliott and David Sloan Wilson, 1994, “A Critical
Review of Philosophical Work on the Units of Selection Problem”,
Philosophy of Science
, 61(4): 534–555.
doi:10.1086/289821
Stanford, P. Kyle, 2001, “The Units Of Selection And The
Causal Structure Of The World”,
Erkenntnis
, 54(2):
215–233. doi:10.1023/A:1005641025742
Stanley, Steven M., 1973, “An Explanation for Cope’s
Rule”,
Evolution
, 27(1): 1–26.
doi:10.2307/2407115
–––, 1975, “A Theory of Evolution above
the Species Level”,
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences
, 72(2): 646–650. doi:10.1073/pnas.72.2.646
Stauffer, R.C. (ed.), 1975,
Charles Darwin’s Natural
Selection: Being the Second Part of His Big Species Book Written from
1856 to 1858
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Stephens, Christopher, 2004, “Selection, Drift, and the
‘Forces’ of Evolution”,
Philosophy of
Science
, 71(4): 550–570. doi:10.1086/423751
Sterelny, Kim, 1995, “Basic Minds”,
Philosophical
Perspectives
, 9: 251–270. doi:10.2307/2214221
–––, 1996, “The Return of the
Group”,
Philosophy of Science
, 63(4): 562–584.
doi:10.1086/289977
–––, 2001a,
Dawkins vs. Gould: Survival of
the Fittest
, Cambridge: Icon Books.
–––, 2001b, “The Reality of Ecological
Assemblages: A Palaeo-Ecological Puzzle”,
Biology &
Philosophy
, 16(4): 437–461. doi:10.1023/A:1011972529013
–––, 2005, “Another View of Life”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part C: Studies in
History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical Sciences
,
36(3): 585–593. doi:10.1016/j.shpsc.2005.07.008
Sterelny, Kim and Philip Kitcher, 1988, “The Return of the
Gene”,
The Journal of Philosophy
, 85(7): 339–361.
doi:10.2307/2026953
Sterelny, Kim, Kelly C. Smith, and Michael Dickison, 1996,
“The Extended Replicator”,
Biology &
Philosophy
, 11(3): 377–403. doi:10.1007/BF00128788
Szathmáry, Eörs, 2015, “Toward Major
Evolutionary Transitions Theory 2.0”,
Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences
, 112(33): 10104–10111.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1421398112
Szathmáry, Eörs and John Maynard Smith, 1995,
“The Major Evolutionary Transitions”,
Nature
,
374(6519): 227–232. doi:10.1038/374227a0
Templeton, Alan R. and L. Val Giddings, 1981,
“Macroevolution Conference”,
Science
, 211(4484):
770–773. doi:10.1126/science.211.4484.770-a
Travisano, M, J.A. Mongold, A.F. Bennett, and R.E. Lenski, 1995,
“Experimental Tests of the Roles of Adaptation, Chance, and
History in Evolution”,
Science
, 267(5194): 87–90.
doi:10.1126/science.7809610
Tucker, Aviezer, 2004,
Our Knowledge of the Past: A Philosophy
of Historiography
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511498381
Turner, Derek D., 2009, “How Much Can We Know about the
Causes of Evolutionary Trends?”,
Biology &
Philosophy
, 24(3): 341–357. doi:10.1007/s10539-008-9139-5
–––, 2010, “Punctuated Equilibrium and
Species Selection: What Does It Mean for One Theory to Suggest
Another?”,
Theory in Biosciences
, 129(2–3):
113–123. doi:10.1007/s12064-010-0088-6
–––, 2011a, “Gould’s Replay
Revisited”,
Biology & Philosophy
, 26(1): 65–79.
doi:10.1007/s10539-010-9228-0
–––, 2011b,
Paleontology: A Philosophical
Introduction
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9780511921100
–––, 2014, “Causal Explanations of
Historical Trends”, in
Explanation in the Special
Sciences
, Marie I. Kaiser, Oliver R. Scholz, Daniel Plenge, and
Andreas Hüttemann (eds.), Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands,
255–269. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-7563-3_12
–––, 2015, “Historical Contingency and the
Explanation of Evolutionary Trends”, in
Explanation in
Biology
, Pierre-Alain Braillard and Christophe Malaterre (eds.),
(History, Philosophy and Theory of the Life Sciences 11), Dordrecht:
Springer Netherlands, 73–90. doi:10.1007/978-94-017-9822-8_4
–––, 2017, “Paleobiology’s Uneasy
Relationship with the Darwinian Tradition: Stasis as Data”, in
The Darwinian Tradition in Context
, Richard G. Delisle (ed.),
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 333–352.
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-69123-7_15
Uyeda, Josef C., Thomas F. Hansen, Steven J. Arnold, and Jason
Pienaar, 2011, “The Million-Year Wait for Macroevolutionary
Bursts”,
Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences
, 108(38): 15908–15913.
doi:10.1073/pnas.1014503108
Fraassen, Bas C. van, 1989,
Laws and Symmetry
, New York:
Oxford University Press. doi:10.1093/0198248601.001.0001
Vrba, Elisabeth S., 1984, “What Is Species
Selection?”,
Systematic Zoology
, 33(3): 318–328.
doi:10.2307/2413077
–––, 1987, “Ecology in Relation to
Speciation Rates: Some Case Histories of Miocene-Recent Mammal
Clades”,
Evolutionary Ecology
, 1(4): 283–300.
doi:10.1007/BF02071554
Vrba, Elisabeth S. and Niles Eldredge, 1984, “Individuals,
Hierarchies and Processes: Towards a More Complete Evolutionary
Theory”,
Paleobiology
, 10(2): 146–171.
doi:10.1017/S0094837300008149
Wade, Michael J., 1978, “A Critical Review of the Models of
Group Selection”,
The Quarterly Review of Biology
,
53(2): 101–114. doi:10.1086/410450
Walsh, D.M., 2000, “Chasing Shadows: Natural Selection and
Adaptation”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
Part C: Studies in History and Philosophy of Biological and Biomedical
Sciences
, 31(1): 135–153.
doi:10.1016/S1369-8486(99)00041-2
–––, 2004, “Bookkeeping or Metaphysics?
The Units of Selection Debate”,
Synthese
, 138(3):
337–361. doi:10.1023/B:SYNT.0000016426.73707.92
Walsh, Denis, Tim Lewins, and André Ariew, 2002, “The
Trials of Life: Natural Selection and Random Drift”,
Philosophy of Science
, 69(3): 429–446.
doi:10.1086/342454
Waters, C. Kenneth, 1991, “Tempered Realism about the Force
of Selection”,
Philosophy of Science
, 58(4): 553–573.
doi:10.1086/289640
–––, 2005, “Why Genic and Multilevel
Selection Theories Are Here to Stay”,
Philosophy of
Science
, 72(2): 311–333. doi:10.1086/432426
West-Eberhard, Mary Jane, 2003,
Developmental Plasticity and
Evolution
, New York: Oxford University Press.
Williams, George C., 1966,
Adaptation and Natural Selection: A
Critique of Some Current Evolutionary Thought
, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Wilson, D.S., 1975, “A Theory of Group Selection”,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences
, 72(1):
143–146.
Wilson, Edward O., 1973, “Group Selection and Its
Significance for Ecology”,
BioScience
, 23(11):
631–638. doi:10.2307/1296775
Wilson, Jack, 1999,
Biological Individuality: The Identity and
Persistence of Living Entities
, New York: Cambridge University
Press. doi:10.1017/CBO9781139137140
Wilson, Mark, 2006,
Wandering Significance: An Essay on
Conceptual Behavior
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199269259.001.0001
Wilson, Robert A., 2003, “Pluralism, Entwinement, and the
Levels of Selection”,
Philosophy of Science
, 70(3):
531–552. doi:10.1086/376784
Wilson, Robert A. and Matthew Barker, 2013 [2018], “The
Biological Notion of Individual”, in
The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
(Summer 2018 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).
URL =
 >
https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2018/entries/biology-individual/
<
Wimsatt, William C., 1980, “Reductionistic Research
Strategies and Their Biases in the Units of Selection
Controversy”, in
Scientific Discovery: Case Studies
,
Thomas Nickles (ed.), (Boston Studies in the Philosophy of Science
60), Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, 213–259.
doi:10.1007/978-94-009-9015-9_13
Woodward, James, 2000, “Explanation and Invariance in the
Special Sciences”,
The British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 51(2): 197–254. doi:10.1093/bjps/51.2.197
–––, 2001, “Law and Explanation in
Biology: Invariance Is the Kind of Stability That Matters”,
Philosophy of Science
, 68(1): 1–20. doi:10.1086/392863
–––, 2004,
Making Things Happen: A Theory of
Causal Explanation
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/0195155270.001.0001
Wray, Gregory A., Hopi E. Hoekstra, Douglas J. Futuyma, Richard E.
Lenski, Trudy F. C. Mackay, Dolph Schluter, and Joan E. Strassmann,
2014, “Does Evolutionary Theory Need a Rethink? No, All Is
Well”,
Nature
, 514(7521): 161–164.
doi:10.1038/514161a
Wright, Sewall, 1945, “Tempo and Mode in Evolution: A
Critical Review”,
Ecology
, 26(4): 415–419.
doi:10.2307/1931666
–––, 1956, “Modes of Selection”,
The American Naturalist
, 90(850): 5–24.
doi:10.1086/281903
Wynne-Edwards, Vero Copner, 1962,
Animal Dispersion in
Relation to Social Behavior
, Edinburgh: Oliver and Boyd.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Extinct: The Philosophy of Palaeontology Blog
Havstad, Joyce C., 2016, 
“
A Philosophical Introduction to
Paleontology: A Philosophical Introduction
”,
29 February.
Zhao, Helen, 2017, 
“
Counterfactual History & The Minimal Rewrite Rule
”, 31 July.
Related Entries
adaptationism
|
biological individuals
|
biology: philosophy of
|
creationism
|
Darwinism
|
evolution
|
fitness
|
genetic drift
|
genetics: population
|
history, philosophy of
|
laws of nature
|
natural selection
|
natural selection: units and levels of
|
reduction, scientific: in biology
|
species
|
teleology: teleological notions in biology