Pufendorf’s Moral and Political Philosophy
First published Fri Sep 3, 2010; substantive revision Wed Mar 31, 2021
Samuel Freiherr von Pufendorf (1632–1694) was almost as unknown
during most of the 19th and 20th centuries as he had been familiar
during the preceding hundred years and more. His fate shows well how
philosophical interests shape historical background narratives. More
or less consciously, individual thinkers and the traditions they spawn
frame themselves in terms of an edited past which – as in other
forms of genealogy – they either appropriate, reject, revise, or
ignore. Thus intellectual ancestry is always more controversial than
biological inheritance, and the mere presence or absence of thinkers
in particular developmental accounts is not necessarily an accurate
indication of their actual historical role or importance.
Pufendorf’s thought is situated in post-Westphalian Europe, as
the Holy Roman Empire underwent a reconfiguration of power
relationships among its quasi-autonomous constituent states (Austria,
Bavaria, Palatinate, Saxony, Brandenburg, and others), while
maintaining a guarded posture toward external, competing powers such
as France, England, the United Provinces, Sweden, Denmark, Poland, and
Spain. Its main goals were to avoid relapse into confessional warfare,
and to ward off the respective French and Ottoman threats on its
western and eastern borders. In this context Pufendorf developed a
theory about the moral relationships of agents (individuals and
groups), the authority and duties of states, and the lawful
interactions among these. His chief objective, too, was to avoid
destructive social conflict and the devolution on any level into the
antagonistic and, he thought, self-defeating condition known as the
state of nature.
Pufendorf’s approach was secular, non-metaphysical, and
anti-authoritarian; it eschewed religious appeals, scholastic dogma,
essentialism, teleology, and the frequent mix of these that appealed
to many German thinkers, Catholic and Protestant alike. Instead, it
built on Bodin, Lipsius, Grotius, Hobbes, and the Italian
reason-of-state tradition. Because of it, Pufendorf is known as a
voluntarist in ethics, a sovereignty theorist in politics, and a
realist in international relations theory. His kind of natural law is
called ‘modern’ or ‘Protestant’ (Tuck 1987,
Haakonssen 2004), in contrast to the metaphysical, neoscholastic,
rationalist, or even Platonic version of the genre represented not
only by the School of Salamanca (Suarez, Vitoria) but also Leibniz and
then Wolff. Known as a philosopher and a jurist, Pufendorf was also a
respected historian whose accounts of (mostly, the external relations
of) various European states exemplified his basic philosophical
concepts. He wrote notably on church-state relations, on intellectual
and religious toleration, and on the Baconian theme of innovation in
philosophy. Because of the clarity and comprehensiveness of his works,
their intellectual acuity, and their polemical edge and consequent
notoriety, they were translated into many European languages and thus
provided – often in the form of pedagogical tools – many
of the basic concepts and distinctions operative in the 18th-century
discourse about morality, society, politics, history, and
international affairs. Indeed, both directly and through his many
editors, translators, and imitators, Pufendorf was largely responsible
for the so-called ubiquity of natural law as a shared discourse during
the following century (Haakonssen 2012).
1. Life  & Works
2. The Method of Modern Natural Law
2.1 Modern Natural Law
2.2 Pufendorf’s Philosophical Method
3. Moral Philosophy
3.1 Moral Entities
3.2 Moral Necessity
3.3 The Natural State
3.4 The Law of Nature
3.5 Types of Duties
3.6 Speech, Property, and Commerce
4. Political Philosophy
4.1 Pre-Civil Societies
4.2 The State
4.3 Natural Law and History
5. Influence
5.1 Literary Afterlife
5.2 18th-Century Presence
5.3 Eclipse & Rediscovery
Bibliography
Primary Sources: Works by Pufendorf
Other Primary Sources
Secondary Sources
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Life & Works
Samuel Pufendorf was born on January 8, 1632 in Dorfchemnitz, a small
town southwest of Chemnitz in Saxony. The region’s Protestant
elector, Johann Georg, had just been compelled by the Imperial Edict
of Restitution (1629), and by Tilly’s sack of Magdeburg (1631),
to abandon his neutral stance in the Thirty Years War and join the
newly arrived (1630) Swedes under Gustavus Adolphus in an
anti-Habsburg alliance. This, and his return to the Imperial fold in
1635, exposed his territories to previously avoided predations that
would influence the young Pufendorf’s outlook on the Empire,
religion, and political power – if not also the human condition
more generally. Samuel’s father, Esaias Pufendorf, assumed the
Lutheran pastorate at nearby Flöha in 1633, and it was there a
few years later that the family experienced first-hand the terrors of
the war (Döring 1996a). There were ten children beside Samuel,
seven of whom survived to adulthood. Of these he was the second
youngest of four brothers, some three years behind Esaias
(1628–1687), who would become one of Europe’s most
accomplished diplomats and remained, as well, Samuel’s lifelong
confidant and benefactor (Bérenger 1993, Fiedler 2003). The
dedication in Pufendorf’s
Select Academic Dissertations
(DAS 1675b) acknowledges the debt.
Like his brothers, Pufendorf was home-schooled until age thirteen
(1645), when his poverty and Latinity qualified him for admission to
the subsidized
Fürstenschule
at Grimma, near Leipzig.
There he studied grammar, logic, rhetoric, the Bible, Lutheran
theology, and the Greek and Latin classics (Meyer 1894). His
particular relish for the latter laid the foundations of the broad
philological competence evident in and formative of his natural law
writings. Indeed, shortly before leaving for Leipzig in the fall of
1650 he was chosen to compose a Latin poem celebrating the 100th
anniversary of the school.
Leipzig: The university at Leipzig was far more cultivated and diverse
than acknowledged by 19th-century authors like Treitschke (Treitschke
1897; Döring 2004, 1994), though it remained a center of Lutheran
orthodoxy, polemically anti-Calvinist and anti-Catholic, and generally
devoted to a metaphysical scholasticism and Aristotelianism closely
tied to theology. Samuel’s studies there included this
discipline, which his father had intended as a preparation for the
ministry. However, like his brother Esaias, and as indicated by his
own extra-curricular activities in the
Collegium Anthologicum
– a student academic society before which he made some fifty
presentations on philological, biblical, historical, and political
themes (in KVS 1995e, pp. 21–86]; see Döring 1988,1992)
– he also expanded his studies into other areas including
philosophy, jurisprudence, and mathematics. He remained at Leipzig
until early 1658, with an intervening year (1657) at Jena where he
received his
Magister
(bachelor’s) degree. In Jena,
Pufendorf (like Leibniz after him) lived and studied with Erhard
Weigel (1625–1699), the eclectic mathematician and polymath (who
had moved there from Leipzig several years earlier) by whom he was
introduced to Galileo, Grotius, Descartes, and Hobbes – authors
without whom his future views would have been unimaginable. It was
from Weigel, too, that Pufendorf seems to have derived the important
distinction between physical and moral entities, as well as the
methodological ideal of a mathematically rigorous, or demonstrative
system of moral philosophy (Sprenger 1996) to which he initially
aspired (especially in distinguishing himself from Aristotelian virtue
theory).
Denmark: Sweden’s involvement in the Thirty Years War and its
stake in the Westphalian treaty that ended it increased the presence
of its aristocrats at many German courts and universities, including
Leipzig and Heidelberg. Esaias had already parlayed such contacts into
a Swedish diplomatic career and now urged his brother to do the same,
in view of the limited professional prospects in Saxony. Thus, in
April 1658 Samuel assumed the post of tutor to the family of
Sweden’s special envoy to Copenhagen, Peter Julius Coyet. This
choice proved eventful, for when Charles X. Gustav unexpectedly
renewed the First Northern War (1655–1660) against Denmark, the
Swedish delegation was imprisoned for eight months. It was then,
without access to library or books, that Pufendorf wrote his first
major work,
Elements of Universal Jurisprudence
(EJU 1660),
which is explicitly based on Grotius and Hobbes. Upon being released
in 1659, and after a serious illness and nearly dying by shipwreck in
the Baltic, Pufendorf went to Holland as Coyet’s secretary. In
spring 1660 he was enrolled at Leiden University, and though we have
few details about this period it appears that he turned to philology
again. He became acquainted with the classical scholar Johann
Friedrich Gronovius and prepared editions of several Neo-Latin works,
including Johannes Meursius,
Miscellanea Laconica
(1660) and
Johannes Lauremberg,
Graecia antiqua
(1661). More important,
however, was his acquaintance with Peter de Groot, Hugo’s son
and the Palatine Elector’s representative in Holland. For it was
at his suggestion that Pufendorf strategically dedicated his captivity
manuscript to Karl Ludwig (1617–1680), who promptly responded
with the offer of a university position at Heidelberg (Döring
2006).
Heidelberg: The Palatinate was one of the most devastated and
depopulated regions during the Thirty Years War, and its university
reopened only in 1652. Karl Ludwig sought initially to install
Pufendorf in the (upper) law faculty there, as there was a vacancy in
Roman law (Justinian’s
Institutes
). However, when both
Pufendorf and the faculty senate demurred, the offer became a
professorship in “philology and the law of nations” within
the (lower, or preparatory) philosophy faculty – a position that
addressed both the university’s needs and Pufendorf’s more
obvious qualifications. There is no clear basis for Pufendorf’s
claim to have held the very first chair in “the law of nature
and of nations” in Germany, and no support for the academic
legend that he later sought a position in the law faculty and, when
passed over, spitefully wrote
The Present State of Germany
(Monz. 1667) – a severe critique of legal theories about the
Empire – to prove his qualifications (Döring 2006). Much of
Pufendorf’s time in Heidelberg was taken up with lecturing (on
Grotius and Tacitus), and with developing the ideas of the
Elements
, particularly through a series of dissertations that
– according to the practice of the time – were written
mostly by himself but defended orally by his students. The latter
included a number of Swedish nobles – such as his former charge,
the young (Wilhelm Julius) Coyet, and the son of the Swedish
chancellor Gabriel Gabrielsson Oxenstierna, and the (illegitimate) son
of the late Charles X. Gustav (Gustav Carlsson) – some of whom
also resided with Pufendorf. These and other services on behalf of
Sweden’s interests in Heidelberg, and the continuing support of
Esaias, led to the offer, in late 1666, of a position at the newly
established University of Lund (in Scania, the Danish province
recently acquired by Sweden). Pufendorf’s departure from
Heidelberg was apparently a career move and he always spoke positively
of his time there, explicitly valuing the “freedom to
philosophize” that he had enjoyed (Jägerskjöld
1985).
Sweden: Pufendorf arrived in Lund in mid-1668 to assume his position as
professor primarius
of the law of nature and of nations (in
the Law faculty), and of ethics and politics (in the Philosophy
faculty). Immediately popular as a teacher, well-connected at court,
as well as confident and outspoken, he was soon embroiled in personal
and academic conflicts with some of his colleagues, particularly the
jurist Nikolaus Beckmann and the theologian Josua Schwartz, who
recruited the Lutheran bishop of Lund (Peter Winstrup) to their cause.
Their discontent with Pufendorf’s
On the Law of Nature and
of Nations
(DJN 1672), whose publication they actively tried to
hinder, was articulated in
An Index of Certain Novelties …
against the Foundations of Orthodoxy
(
Index quarundam
novitatum … contra orthodoxa fundamenta
[1673]) – a
list of thirty-one supposed errors in that work. The religious
coloration of some accusations made it a dangerous matter for
Pufendorf, yet he managed through his court connections to suppress
both the
Index
and the relentless attacks in Lund (Beckmann
was eventually banished). Still, the
Index
led to the
prohibition of Pufendorf’s work in Saxony and embroiled him in
bitter conflicts with professors there for many years. His articulate
responses during this prolonged debate, including his
self-justificatory autobiography, were later published under the title
of
Scandinavian Quarrel
(ES 1686c). The collection not only
reveals Pufendorf as a consummate polemicist but is also valuable for
the clarification of important points in his natural law treatises,
and as an entry into the bitter debates (in Germany) between secular
natural lawyers and the Lutheran scholastics and theologians whom they
challenged (De Angelis 2004).
In 1673 Pufendorf published
On the Duty of Man and Citizen
According to Natural Law
(DO 1673), a short compendium based on
DJN that guaranteed him a place in university curricula for a century.
Moreover, a collection of his dissertations from both the Heidelberg
and Lund periods appeared in 1675 as
Select Academic
Dissertations
(DAS). That year also saw the appearance of a
lengthy political tract (
Discussion of Certain Writers of
Brandenburg
[Discussio, in KVS 1995e, pp. 235–336])
justifying Sweden’s entry into the Dutch War (1672–1678)
on the side of France, particularly its unprovoked attack (1674) on
Brandenburg. This war also occasioned a Danish invasion of Scania,
including Lund, and even though the young Charles XI (1655–1697)
defeated the invaders, the university remained closed for years. So
Pufendorf moved to Stockholm (1677), assuming the duties of royal
Swedish historiographer and, later, privy councillor and private
secretary (1682) to the dowager queen, Hedwig Eleonora. He continued
to cultivate his relations with the Swedish ruling class, wrote
additional political opinions (including
Dissertation on the
Alliances between Sweden and France
[Occas. 1680, in KVS, pp.
337–385]; see Saunders 2009), and began the laborious archival
work that underlay his large histories of Sweden (Gust. Ad., C.
Gust.). These accounts focused mainly on external, international
affairs. However, Pufendorf’s detailed knowledge of internal
Swedish politics is evident in
Les anecdotes de Suède
(Pufendorf 1719), which was written during Sweden’s turn toward
royal absolutism in the 1680s (the
Reduktion
). That piece has
sometimes been attributed to Esaias, though there is an autograph in
Samuel’s hand (Döring 2012, p. 199, n. 58).
Pufendorf had also lectured on history at Lund and Heidelberg, and in
1682 after the appearance of a pirated, Swedish version of this
material based on student notes, he issued (one of only two works in
German)
An Introduction to the History of the Principal Kingdoms
and States of Europe
(Einl.). The twelfth chapter of this work
contains a long, critical account of the papacy that had appeared
pseudonymously several years earlier (
Basilii Hyperetae
historische und politische Beschreibung der geistlichen Monarchie des
Stuhls zu Rom
[1679]). Moreover, through the 1695 English version
it acquired a thirteenth chapter, which is a actually a condensation
– by the translator (Jodocus Crull, see Seidler 2013) – of
the independent volume on Sweden (
Continued Introduction
[Einl. 1686b]) whereby Pufendorf had supplemented the
Introduction
in 1686. Both
Introductions
underwent
multiple editions in many languages well into the 18th century. During
the early 1680s Pufendorf also prepared a significantly revised
edition (1684) of DJN which emphasized the similarities to Cumberland
and Stoicism (Palladini 2002, Saastamoinen 1999/2000) to make its
problematic Hobbesian inheritance less obvious and, perhaps, his life
easier (Palladini 1990, 2008).
Berlin: During one of his trips to the Continent to gather archival
materials and see to the publication of his
Twenty-six Books of
Commentary on Swedish Affairs from the Expedition of King Gustav
Adolph into Germany up to the Abdication of
[
Queen
]
Christina
(Gust. Ad. 1686a), Pufendorf entered into
negotiations with the Great Elector, Frederick William of Brandenburg,
who issued a formal invitation in 1686. This was doubly attractive at
the time. For not only had Brandenburg replaced Sweden as the main
defender of an increasingly beleaguered Protestantism, now squeezed
between Austria and France, but Sweden’s internal affairs had
taken a sharp turn to the right, toward monarchical absolutism and
religious conservatism. In Berlin, by contrast, Frederick
William’s long-standing toleration politics met Louis
XIV’s recent revocation of the Edict of Nantes with the Edict of
Potsdam (1685), which invited the fleeing Huguenots to his
territories. Also in Stockholm, despite Pufendorf’s still close
relations to Charles XI and Hedwig Eleonora, some of his main
supporters at court had been dismissed, and his brother Esaias –
whose pro-French stance was now out of favor – would soon leave
Swedish service (1687) and be sentenced to death
in absentia
(1689). Among the last works written by Pufendorf in Sweden was a
defense of Cartesianism (in the sense of independent philosophical
inquiry) against the Swedish clergy, who had sought to ban it from the
universities there (in KVS 1995e, pp. 432–47), and
Of the
Nature and Qualification of Religion in Reference to Civil
Society
(Habitu 1687), a treatise that condemned the French
dragonades and argued for the separation of church and state as a
means to religious toleration.
Given the Swedes’ past hostilities with Brandenburg,
Pufendorf’s thorough knowledge of their archives, and the fact
that he had yet to complete his history of Charles X. Gustav, the
Swedes were loath to send him to Berlin. However, after considerable
delay he was given what was technically a leave of absence
(Döring 1996b, Riches 2004, 2013). He arrived in Berlin in early
1688, actually to prepare a history of Frederick William (who died
later that year) but formally as an aulic and privy councillor,
positions with greater status at court than royal historian. During
the next six years Pufendorf completed his history of the Great
Elector (Fr. Wilh. 1695b) and began an account of his successor,
Frederick III (1657–1713), which is notable for its long (and
unregarded) narrative of the 1688 English Revolution (Pufendorf 1784,
see Seidler 1996). Moreover, he prepared a revised edition of
The
Present State of Germany
(published by Nikolaus Gundling in 1706)
and he wrote
The Divine Feudal Law
(Feciale 1695a), a work on
inter-confessional reconciliation (among Lutherans and Calvinists)
and, barring that, religious and political toleration. In 1694
Pufendorf returned briefly to Sweden to arrange for the publication of
his
On the Deeds of Charles Gustav, King of Sweden
(C. Gust.
1696), to collect a baronetcy (thus, his
Freiherr
status),
and to conduct some diplomatic business between the two monarchs. A
stroke or aneurism while in Stockholm led to other medical
complications that resulted in his death, in Berlin, on Oct. 26, 1694.
Quite appropriately, given his life-long interest in lay theology and
his involvement with informal religious gatherings called
collegia
pietatis
, as well as his emphasis on the biblical and moral
dimensions of religion rather than its doctrinal aspects, the funeral
sermon at the Nikolai-Kirche, where he lies buried, was delivered by
his close friend, Philipp Jakob Spener (1635–1705), one of the
founders of German Pietism.
2. The Method of Modern Natural Law
2.1 Modern Natural Law
The intellectual tradition with which Pufendorf is associated, and to
which he was later seen as central, has been variously termed modern,
secular, or Protestant. Indeed, the first chapter of his
Sample of
Controversies
(
Specimen controversiarum
, 1678; in ES)
originated the historiography of the genre. (See section 5.2 below.)
As critics of that self-interpretation have pointed out and Pufendorf
himself admitted, elements of the approach were already present in
previous traditions, including Stoicism, Roman law, Christian and
scholastic thought (particularly Vitoria, Vasquez, and Suarez), and
the Grotius commentary literature (Tierney 1997, Brett 1997,
Haakonssen 1998, Seelmann 2000, Oakley 2005, Behme 1996, Hartung 2008,
Reibstein 1953–54). Still, Pufendorf and those who shared his
outlook claimed a kind of Baconian novelty for their enterprise. This
lay in its eschewal of metaphysics and theology as foundations for
philosophy, in its rejection of appeals to authority, and in its
assertion of an ‘eclectic’ privilege not only to mix and
compare different perspectives, but also to place new bodies of
knowledge on a so-called scientific footing (BW #137, 1996, p.194;
Hochstrasser 2000). The founder (in the sense of first practitioner)
of this so-called “noble discipline of natural law” was
according to Pufendorf “the incomparable Hugo Grotius,”
who “set out to construct a work wherein he was not ruled by the
influence of his precedessors” and that resisted the fragmenting
tendencies of discrepant opinions (ES 2002b, p. 126).
Pufendorf’s assessment was seconded by his French translator,
Jean Barbeyrac (1674–1744), who noted too – in his famous
Preface (1706), §28 – that with Bacon and Grotius
“the Science of Morality was … rais’d again from
the Dead” (in DJN 2005 [1729], p. 78), and that it was Pufendorf
who had corrected, improved, and systematized it. (§31)
The controversial beginning (and eventual
locus classicus
) of
the new approach, which would aspire to rigor and persuasion in morals
and politics in the way that Descartes had sought them for science and
metaphysics, was Grotius’s “Preliminary Discourse”
or “Prolegomena” (§§ 5–8) to
On the
Right of War and Peace
(1625). For there, the Dutch classicist,
ambassador, and corporate counsel for the Dutch East India Company
challenged the moral relativism advocated by the ancient skeptic,
Carneades, by laying out the basic requirements of communal living.
Unlike Carneades, his professional concerns were not epistemological
argument, moral proof, or philosophical system as such, but rather the
concrete mitigation of conflicts and the maintenance of peace.
Appealing to a so-called principle of sociality or sociability
(conceived as both presupposition and requirement), he sought to
identify the most general or minimal, and thus most widely acceptable,
rights and laws of human association. These focused mainly, in his own
case, on international matters of war and peace, but in other natural
lawyers like Pufendorf they addressed the entire range of human
affairs. The modernity of the project, as well as its secularism, lay
as noted in the intentional avoidance of biblical, theological, and
confessional presuppositions, and in the rejection of the essentialism
and associated teleology of classical (abstract) realism – which
were thought to generate or exacerbate rather than to resolve
intellectual and practical controversies (Forbes 1975, Tuck 1979 and
1987, Todescan 2001, Ekardt and Richter 2006, Hunter 2007b). Instead,
and in the manner of the physical sciences, the new discipline devised
explanations that emulated (somehow) mathematical reasoning and
appealed to concrete observation, attempting thereby to create a
shared outlook possessing theoretical coherence, empirical
plausibility, and pragmatic effect (Röd 1970, Dufour 1980).
This reading of the modern natural law project is rooted in the texts,
it was promoted by Barbeyrac, and it has been persuasively articulated
mainly by Tuck (1979, 1987). However, aside from criticisms focused on
its casting of Grotius and Hobbes (Mautner 2005, Sommerville 2001,
Zagorin 2000), it also seems wanting now as a comprehensive
interpretation of Pufendorf by being too inattentive to his more
immediate social and intellectual contexts. These included the
political and confessional status of the Empire and, more
specifically, the metaphysical, theological, and Lutheran culture of
northern Germany, Saxony in particular – as represented by
conservative, Platonizing scholastics like Johann Benedict Carpzov,
Adam Scherzer, Valentin Veltheim, and Valentin Alberti, with whom
Pufendorf and his younger colleague, Christian Thomasius
(1655–1728), contended through much of their academic lives
(Hunter 2007b, 2001; Palladini 1978; Sparn 1976). This conflict was
practical and immediate as well as theoretical, affecting German
academic culture for another century up to and including Kant (Hunter
2005). For the opponents propounded a theocratic politics guided by
Scriptural interpretation and supernatural metaphysics accessible only
or especially to (philosophical) theologians, in contrast to the
secular conception of the state and its subsidiary institutions (such
as the judiciary and the universities) proposed by Pufendorf and
Thomasius. In fact, the two readings may intersect and complement one
another. For Grotius, Hobbes, and also Descartes (especially his idea
of philosophical liberation and innovation) certainly influenced
Pufendorf, albeit in a characteristically German, Protestant, and
Lutheran setting that he helped to transform with their assistance
(Friedeburg 2008, Friedeburg and Seidler 2007, Dufour 2005, Schmoeckel
2013b).
Clearly, early modern Protestantism was in this as well as other
respects a house divided, pitting those inclined to transcendent
metaphysics and theological authority against the innovators who
rejected this approach. Of course, it is the latter stream – to
which Grotius, Hobbes, Pufendorf, C. Thomasius, (and sometimes Wolff)
are seen to belong – that is intended by the characterization of
early modern natural law as distinctively ‘Protestant’.
Because of its rejection of scholastic rationalism and universalism,
and its interest in the particular, the singular, and the irregular
(Seidler 2011) on various levels of analysis (i.e., its appreciation
of difference and insistence on dissent, its ‘protestant’
and broadly anti-‘imperial’ character), the discipline is
also aptly described as ‘individualistic’ (Haakonssen
2004). And this feature links it, in turn, to the characteristic
‘voluntarism’ of the genre (Schneewind 1998, Haakonssen
1998), in distinction to the generally intellectualist bent of both
ancient and medieval natural law (Hunter 2003b, Haakonssen and Seidler
2015). Voluntarism acknowledged not only God’s supreme and
singular omnipotence (exercised through the divine will), and thus the
(to us) arbitrariness, contingency, and cognitive imperviousness of
the (created) world, but also humans’ individual and collective
power over, and thus responsibility for, their own actions and the
institutional contexts regulating them. In sum, the approach was
secular rather than atheistic, as it typically combined relatively
sparse convictions derived from natural theology (understood as a
minimalist philosophical view about a creative, providential deity and
his formal role in generating moral obligation) with an emphasis on
personal religiosity and confessional neutrality, especially in the
political sphere. That is, it privatized (and to some extent
moralized) religion, it demarcated theology from philosophy (Tully
1991), and it denied theoretical and political advantage to
dogmatists, including those inclined to play the God card from the
side of reason or philosophical metaphysics.
2.2 Pufendorf’s Philosophical Method
Like other early modern reformist schemes, Pufendorf’s project
faced the central question of method in more specific terms. Initially
he followed the example of Weigel, his Cartesian mentor at Jena (whose
own
Arithmetic Description of Moral Wisdom
would appear only
in 1674; see Weigel 2003), by employing a quasi-mathematical approach
that aspired to demonstrative certitude in moral matters in place of
Aristotelian probabilism. Thus, the early EJU (1660) was formally
divided into Definitions (Bk.1) and Principles (Bk.2), with the latter
subdivided into Axioms and Observations. The truth and necessity of
the Axioms flowed directly “from reason itself” and a
“bare intuition of the mind,” without the apprehension of
particulars, or interpersonal discussion, while the certainty of the
Observations was known by the “collation and perception of
individual things corresponding to one another,” and by
“common sense and experience” (EJU 1999, pp. 6, 117;
Dufour 1980, Röd 1970, Bach 2013).
However, Pufendorf adapted this approach in subsequent works. Though
he purported still to favor a ‘mathematical’ over an
(“lubrica, infinita, et vere invia”) empirical approach
when writing to (Johan Christian von) Boineburg (1622–1672) in
January 1663 (BW #16, 1996, p. 24), criticism by Hermann Conring
(1601–1681) and Johann Heinrich Boecler (1611–1672; see
Palladini 1997a), which urged him to include a consideration of other
writers, particularly the ancients, soon led to a change in style.
Thus, beginning with his dissertations at Heidelberg, and then in the
major natural law writings at Lund that emerged therefrom, Pufendorf
eliminated the formal scaffolding of the
mos geometricus
and
interacted more explicitly and directly with other, historical
authors. The new approach enlisted his considerable erudition (DAS
cites over two hundred sources) – in a transitional culture
where a reputation for being learned remained important – while
avoiding mere commentary or appeal to intellectual authority,
procedures which he explicitly dismissed. Instead, Pufendorf now
employed an ‘eclectic’ method that still involved rational
analysis and argument, to be sure, but that also acknowledged the
contingency of both his worldly subject matter and its intellectual
construal (Hochstrasser 2000). The goal remained comprehensive
understanding and demonstrative certitude, but one informed by wide
and reflectively appropriated experience (derived from a careful study
of history and contemporary events), and thus yielding a more
empirically grounded and realistic (think Thucydides, Tacitus,
Machiavelli, Lipsius, Hobbes) sort of moral and political
argument.
3. Moral Philosophy
Pufendorf’s ethical voluntarism is articulated through the
notion of “moral entities” (
entia moralia
,
derived from Weigel), to which most of EJU Book I is devoted (Röd
1969, Kobusch 1996, Lutterbeck 2009, Hunter 2019). Moral entities specify the basic
terms, concepts, categories, distinctions, and classifications –
in a sense, the metaethical grammar and vocabulary – out of
which shared moral discourse is constituted. Conversely, they
designate the ontological correlates or referents of this discourse,
which are reliant on and yet distinct from the merely physical beings
or settings in which they actually inhere. (See Statu #1, 1990, pp.
83–84, 109–10), for the compositional metaphor.) Much of
the machinery of moral entities was carried forward from the EJU to
DJN where, after being formally elaborated in the early chapters, it
clearly structures the whole work.
3.1 Moral Entities
Pufendorf begins DJN by noting the relative inattention to moral
entities as such in comparison to the much-studied objects of the
physical sciences, even though “it greatly behooves man to know
the nature of such entities, which he has received the faculty to
produce, and whose power deeply suffuses itself throughout his
life” (I.1.1; Pufendorf 1994a, p. 99). He calls them
“modes” – in accord with their dependence on
self-subsistent entities (cf. Forde 2011, on Lockean “mixed
modes”) – and says that they are invented
(
inventis
) by reflective beings who, by comparing things,
form certain notions “superadded” to or
“imposed” on the world in order to direct or temper free
and voluntary human acts. (DJN I.1.2–3) Some moral entities are
said to “flow naturally from things themselves, as it were,
while others are superadded to physical things … by an
intelligent power” (DJN I.1.3; Pufendorf 1994a, p. 100). This is
a relative distinction within Pufendorf’s general voluntarist
framework, where God is thought to impose a basic normative dimension
on the world (conjointly and compatibly with its creation), but where
humans in fact devise the (further) distinctions that regulate their
lives together – both in philosophizing about these and by
enacting concrete practices and institutions to regulate them.
Accordingly, one might describe the former as foundational or
structural categories, and the latter as subsidiary, instrumental, or
discretionary tools of analysis. All moral entities, however, of
whatever type, depend for their existence on the will of intelligent
beings who externally assign normative, action-directing significance
to things intrinsically lacking this, but nonetheless somehow
compatible with or receptive to it.
There are four types of moral entities, says Pufendorf, analogous to
categories applied to physical things: (1) states or conditions
(
status
), (2) substances (specifically, persons), and modes
in a more specific sense – namely, (3) moral qualities
(affective/effective modes) and (4) moral quantities (estimative
modes). As in the physical realm, moral ‘states’ designate
a kind of (moral-legal) space in which persons (like bodies) operate
and orient themselves; they are sub-posed by the latter even though
they also, in a sense, depend on them for their existence. Pufendorf
distinguishes two such states, natural and adventitious, the former
referring to the natural state occupied by all humans as such (thus,
the “state of humanity”), and the latter to the special
conditions, institutions, or standing (e.g., commercial, marital,
civil) that differentially accompany it, in being created by and
imposed on particular sorts of persons. Personhood or moral
substantiality refers in turn to the various roles or agencies that
humans play or assume in such contexts, either simply as individuals,
or as composites or collectives, and either on their own behalf or for
others (e.g., sovereigns, ambassadors). Since we typically enact
multiple, overlapping moral personae, it is possible for these to
conflict, not only in the case of individuals but also collectives
like economic associations, religious groups, and political entities
like states, empires, or confederations. It is therefore important to
articulate the respective obligations and rights of (different kinds
of) persons, and to assess and rank them in terms of their relative
moral importance.
Such distinctions require the use of moral qualities and quantities,
which are respectively affective and estimative modes. The latter
involve the valuation of persons, things, or actions in terms of their
social status or esteem, their price (economic value), or their desert
(as in punishment and reward) – all of which are inexact,
comparative, and subject to alteration or adjustment (i.e., moral
imposition is an ongoing process) (Seidler 2018). Moral qualities, in turn, affect
(have an effect on) persons and are either formal (e.g., titles) or
operative, with the latter subdivided into passive and active
varieties. Passive operative qualities enable someone “rightly
to have, suffer, admit, or receive something” (DJN I.1.20),
while active operative qualities are those by which we can morally
affect or move others, as it were. (See Auer 2008, for an association
with Hohfeld.) They are divided into the more familiar notions of
power/authority (
potestas
), obligation (
obligatio
),
and right (
ius
) – which constitute the moral dynamics
of social life. All such notions or entities, it is important to keep
in mind, are imposed or assigned rather than given or found; the
scheme is fundamentally ‘positivistic’.
The inherited term ‘right’ (
ius
) is ambiguous,
says Pufendorf, and it sometimes stands for law (
lex
). Though
it may also be classed as a passive moral quality (as in allowing
someone rightly [
recte
] to receive things), it is active
insofar as it permits us to command persons and possess things. It is
similar, in the latter respect, to power or authority
(
potestas
), which is subdivided into four types depending on
whether it is wielded over persons or things – either
one’s own or those of others. Authority over one’s own
person and actions is freedom (
libertas
), and over those of
others sovereignty (
imperium
); moral power over one’s
own things is ownership or dominion (
dominium
), and over
those of others lordship (
servitus
). Each kind of power may
be acquired, lost, or held in certain ways: for example, the efficacy
or strength of authority may be ‘perfect’ (complete,
exceptionless, enforceable) or ‘imperfect’ (limited,
flexible, merely hortatory or desirable), as may the force of rights;
and the rest of DJN is essentially an account of how this occurs in
the different areas (spaces, or states) of life. The influence of
Pufendorf’s distinctions and their exhaustive application to
particular life sectors was enormous, creating the basic scaffolding
of modern moral discourse. (See Hruschka [2015 et alia].)
3.2 Moral Necessity
Obligation refers to the “moral necessity” at work in such
relationships, by which one is “bound” to do, admit, or
suffer something (DJN I.1.21), and thus it applies to all spheres
where authority, right, or other forms of moral normativity operate.
Pufendorf clarifies obligation at DJN I.6, in his discussion of law,
sanction, and the claims of lawgivers. Law differs, he says there
(referring to Hobbes,
On the Citizen
[
De cive
{1642}] 14.1), from counsel, agreement, and right alike, because by it
an obligation is “introduced into a man’s mind by a
superior, that is by someone who not only has the strength to threaten
some evil against those who resist him, but also legitimate reasons
allowing him to demand that our freedom be restricted at his
discretion.” (DJN I.6.9; Pufendorf 1994a, p.123) That is,
obligation has a dual aspect involving both reason and strength,
neither of which can separately give rise to it: the former generates
reverence or respect in those who are (or take themselves to be)
obligated, and the latter fear. Both are needed, since reverence
without fear does not explain the compellingness of obligation, while
fear without reverence does not explain its legitimacy (DJN III.4.6).
This analysis applies to obligation under both divine and human law,
and in the former case, especially, it raises the question of whether
voluntarism or intellectualism, or an amalgam, offers a more adequate
account of moral duty. The matter has been much debated, starting with
Leibniz’s critique (1706; in Leibniz 1972) and Barbeyrac’s
defense (1718; in Pufendorf 2003) of Pufendorf (see Schneewind 1996a;
Hunter 2004; Lipscomb 2005; Haakonssen 1998; Grunert 2000), and still
in recent discussions (see section 5.3 below) of normativity referring
back to those earlier treatments (Darwall 2012, Irwin 2011a–b,
Pink 2009).
More so than Grotius, Pufendorf clearly distinguished natural and
moral goods (DJN I.2.6), maintaining that the former are morally
indifferent even if generally agreed upon by humans (DJN I.4.4,
II.3.4). Thus, since moral norms are not directly linked to the
intrinsic natures or purposes of things, or to the outcomes of
actions, he was neither a teleologist nor a consequentialist in ethics
(in the sense of maintaining an obligation to achieve or realize
natural ‘goods’ or ‘the good’, which are
assumed already to be morally compelling). However, the so-called
natural goodness or evil of things, their ability to benefit or harm
us, provide the rationale for the imposition of moral entities by
intelligent beings from which obligation springs. That is, they have
(especially in the case of natural goods) a sort of evidentiary
function, explaining why the obliger wills such-and-such, and why the
obligee wills (or might be motivated to) its acceptance. Thus, when
discussing moral persons Pufendorf says that the impositions which
produce that rank or status should have a positive effect (
solidus
effectus
) on humankind and not be made frivolously, as when
Caligula declared his horse a senator, when the ancient Romans deified
their emperors, and when papists, still, declare saints by a similar
sort of post-mortem canonization – all with normative impact
(DJN I.1.15). Similarly, when explaining the legitimating aspect of
commands or obligations (human or divine), or that in them which
evokes our reverence or respect, Pufendorf stresses the commanding
party’s ability and willingness to benefit (or his having done
so) those on whom the obligation lies (DJN I.6.12, DO I.5). In sum,
while natural good and evil are not the source of obligation per se,
and moral necessity is not hypothetical in that sense, they do explain
why there is such a thing as obligation at all, or what the point of
it is. Moreover, since what benefits or harms humans is known through
experience, empirical investigation, and knowledge of the past
(history), these operate as heuristics for determining our obligations
and explain why, in some cases, there may be disagreement about them.
Of course, such differences do not concern whether moral commands as
such formally obligate or not, but whether specific actions are in
fact morally commanded. That at least some of them are (Pufendorf also
allowed for indifferent actions), and that in particular moral spaces
or contexts we can usually determine which ones, is a basic assumption
of Pufendorf’s theory.
3.3 The Natural State
The concept of a natural state is so important to Pufendorf’s
theory that he considered political tracts which ignore it
“gravely defective” (Statu #1, 1990, p. 110). The idea is
discussed in no less than five of his works (EJU, DJN, DO, DAS, and
ES), which basically agree on its characterization and distinctions
(Seidler 1990, Fetscher 1960). DJN alone contains two versions: one
(II.2) to establish the general need for law and moral authority, and
the other (VII.1) to justify civil power or political sovereignty
(
imperium
). These two treatments share a common conception of
legal obligation as justified imposition by a beneficent superior with
access to sanctions. This does not make them redundant, however, even
if the political institutions created to eliminate the second,
pre-civil state of nature are enjoined by same natural law that also
commands (or induces) humans to leave their prior, pre-cultural (and
bestial) states. Civil sovereignty and its mechanisms are needed
precisely because the cooperative institutions (e.g., language,
contract, property, marriage, family, household) that lift humans out
of their previous, natural condition eventually create analogous
coordination problems on another level. Indeed, since similar
difficulties arise among civil states themselves, in an international
state of nature, there is need for yet another solution at that level.
In sum, Pufendorf’s conceptions of morality, politics, and
international law are set against analogous natural states at each
level; this facilitates the respective analyses, though the remaining
differences also prevent their standardization.
The first DJN treatment of the natural state is preceded by a chapter
(II.1) on the concrete importance of law. This discussion provides a
bridge between the conceptual analysis of law and obligation, in Book
I, and the following chapter (II.2) on the natural state, which leads
in turn to the derivation of the natural law in DJN II.3. In it,
Pufendorf presents a moral anthropology suggesting what kinds of moral
entities, or what obligations and laws, should be imposed in view of
“the natural inclinations and pursuits of us mortals” (DJN
II.1.6; Pufendorf 1994a, p. 138). These reveal – especially in
comparison to beasts – that humans’ greater freedom would
actually be disadvantageous to them without further regulation; that
is, randomized freedom, or license, is self-defeating. The argument is
expectably framed by Pufendorf’s general assumption that such
counterproductivity would violate the divine intention of having human
actions display a certain “order, decorum, or beauty” (DJN
II.1.5; Pufendorf 1994a, p. 138); however, it is solidly based as well
on a description of observable human tendencies and behaviors. The
latter show humans to be weak, diverse, and sometimes perverse: not
only are they anxious, ambitious, envious, superstitious, resentful,
vain, vindictive, and the like; but they often disagree with one
another as well, even themselves; and yet (unlike other living things)
they are incapable of securing their basic needs without the aid of
creatures like themselves. For mutual assistance to be possible,
however, and to avoid the difficulties continually generated by the
traits above, human action must be constrained by laws of freedom, as
it were. Without these, humans would sink below the level of brutes,
whose welfare is non-voluntarily secured by physical laws, and they
would remain at liberty only to disrupt and destroy one another. This
sort of inconsistency in human nature was – on religious,
rational, prudential, and it seems aesthetic grounds –
unacceptable to Pufendorf.
The natural state is a theoretical mechanism for further articulating
these considerations. A relative notion, it appears in three distinct
but overlapping versions, the third of which is specially elaborated
by the DJN VII.1 account mentioned above. Each version involves a
polarity or implied contrast: the natural state toward God (
ad
Deum
), that in regard to oneself (
in se
), and that
toward other human beings (
ad alios homines
). The first of
these designates the human condition as such, conceived negatively as
a “state of humanity” in contrast to both the amoral state
of beasts but also “toward [or against] God.” Humans
emerge from it – using their
de facto
traits and
capacities (which Pufendorf associates with “soul”)
– by moralizing themselves through social interaction, gradually
articulating a normative sphere of rights and duties only formally
imposed by their creator. The second natural state, with respect to
oneself (
in se
), designates the basic helplessness of
solitary humans and their almost inevitable lapse into an
uncultivated, bestial life without mutual assistance. Classical
accounts of this state depict individual humans as frustrated in their
most basic needs and desires, and as incapable of the refinement
needed to develop their distinctive faculties and exercise their
freedom. Human interaction can sometimes and to some extent eliminate
the natural state in this sense – a process facilitated by their
prior, and concurrent, emergence from the mere state of humanity. As
the third natural state shows, however, humans may also threaten,
endanger, or interfere with one another unless their freedom is
effectively restrained by law. Here law means more than the
self-interpreted moral law already operative in the first two states
of nature (which, pace Hobbes, are not entirely lawless or amoral);
rather it refers to civil law which must be imposed by a political
superior with both the authority and the effective power to command.
Hence this natural state is best described as a pre-civil state, in
contrast to the pre-cultural and merely human states. Note: in none of
the three states does ‘natural’ function normatively in
the sense of a model or ideal to be realized, as in some other forms
of natural law theory. Instead, norms emerge as one
leaves
such
natural conditions.
As already suggested, the three conditions overlap. Thus, imperfect
humans always remain (albeit tenuously) in the initial state of (mere)
humanity (DJN II.2.9–10), even when the other two natural states
have been partially sublated by culture and politics; for they are
always subject to, and somehow responsible for, the norms deriving
from divine imposition or, alternatively, required by and for human
beings as such. That is, as neither beasts nor gods, they lack the
automatism of the former and the spontaneous goodness of the latter,
and always carry a fallible burden of judgment, as it were. The latter
two states may coincide as well, though usually incompletely, in that
humans may exit a pre-cultural state of need while still in a
pre-civil state of insecurity, or they may enjoy the security of a
civil state while relatively deprived of cultural goods. As well, even
though need satisfaction and cultural development typically occur
before and apart from political order, in cities as opposed to states,
the latter sometimes seem a precondition of the former processes
– as Pufendorf knew well from the circumstances of the Thirty
Years War.
The pre-cultural and pre-civil states of nature especially (i.e.,
those conditions respectively lacking in these respects) are further
distinguished into full or perfect, and partial or limited versions.
The former is purely mythical or hypothetical in that no humans can
exist without their fellows. Complete non-cooperation or complete
hostility are simply impossible, since no one would survive, and the
only reason to consider such scenarios is as heuristic devices
highlighting the conditions that humans actually inhabit (Behme
2009a). Indeed, as Rousseau would iterate in his own way, extreme
versions of the natural state are mere extrapolations from the more
limited, or mixed, conditions found in actual human history and
experience – as when rival families, clans, states, or
(occasionally) formerly cultivated and civil-ized individuals (e.g.,
Crusoe), are temporarily left to their own devices. Much of
Pufendorf’s discussion on the topic takes place through critical
interaction with Grotius, Hobbes, and Spinoza, whose comments on the
natural state he appropriates, alters, or rejects. The paradoxical
upshot of his examination is that humans as such never were, are, or
will be in a pure, full, or perfect natural state, since it would be a
completely barbarous, bellicose, and thus deadly condition. Thus far,
Hobbes was correct. However, as Pufendorf says in rhetorical
opposition to him, Hobbes rather overstated the case; for the natural
state is actually a state of ‘peace’ (DJN II.2.7) –
albeit an imperfect, unstable, and insecure peace (DJN II.2.12).
Accordingly, humans cannot ever – at least in this life –
entirely leave the natural state (in all three senses) behind, as they
are always imperfectly socialized, (only) partially cultivated, and
incompletely or inadequately civil-ized (politic-ized). This explains
their lifelong subjection to moral law and obligation (however
understood), and their need – Pufendorf thought – for some
sort of civil subjugation. That is, insofar as they manage to survive
and thrive at all, they do so through incompletely realized forms of
social cooperation that must (in a variety of ways) be constantly
maintained and improved.
3.4 The Law of Nature
Accordingly, “the most common rule [
regula
]” of
actions, called the right (
ius
) or law (
lex
) of
nature, enjoins that humans “must, inasmuch as [they] can,
cultivate and maintain toward others a peaceable sociality that is
consistent with the native character and end of humankind in
general” (DJN II.3. 1 and 15; Pufendorf 1994a, pp. 148, 152).
This law does not rest on an intrinsic morality of actions, an
absolute value of persons, on common agreement among humans, or even
on the long-term utility that generally follows compliance with its
injunctions (DJN II.3.4, 7–8,10) – though the latter two
are not denied. Rather, it appeals to a divine superior who is taken
to enjoin that which right reason itself can discover to be in
humans’ interest. (DJN II.3.19) That is, while the law’s
content or practical purposiveness is articulated by right reason
observing “man’s nature, condition, and inclinations,
… other things external to man, especially those capable of
benefiting or harming him in some way[,] … and the kinds of
assistance and restraint he needs” (DJN II.3.14; Pufendorf
1994a, p. 151), its normative force as law depends formally on the
will of a super-human authority with the power of sanction (DJN
II.3.19–20). Pufendorf grants that the latter relationship
remains “somewhat obscure” for those who follow the light
of reason alone, since natural sanctions are imperfect and
supernatural sanctions out of play (DJN II.3.21, III.4.6). However,
the voluntarist problem of arbitrariness is avoided by positing
(Pufendorf thinks proving, through natural theology [DO I.4]) divine
benevolence (providence) and consistency: human nature and the law
regulating it are willed together by God for human benefit (DJN
II.3.4–5). (More agnostically, one might refer to the benignity
of things, as it were, the starting assumption that, at the least, the
world is not decidedly against us.) And that supposition in turn is
supported by the evidence of actual experience (both historical and
contemporary), which is in any case the only way to discern and
understand the law’s requirements (DJN II.3.12). In short, God
is not perverse, and the world not entirely inhospitable to morality
and human welfare.
Pufendorf acknowledges the fundamental reality of self-love and the
possibility of reading the natural law as a merely instrumental rule.
However, he denies that self-love is the only human motive or
necessarily in conflict with other motives, and argues that in fact
its aims can be fully or really achieved only through the natural law;
this does command humans to love themselves, albeit in a mitigated,
restrained, and thus more successful way (DJN II.3.14 and 18). That
is, humans are not totally selfish or totally altruistic, but
partially both. Hence the natural law does not forbid the pursuit of
self-interest but merely regulates it, enjoining both the care of self
and the care of others that humans already seek (in a limited and
inadequate fashion). If human nature tended toward one or other
extreme, the law’s injunctions would be either impossible or
unnecessary (i.e., pointless); it is precisely humans’ medial
nature, their motivationally mixed constitution, that accounts for the
law’s normative force – in both its rational (legitimate
reasons) and sanctional (strength) aspects. The argument certainly
requires its voluntarist (and theistic) premise, but it relies as much
on the compatible (and, supposedly, confirmatory) deliverances of
general human experience. In practice, given the stakes involved
according to either interpretation, it often may not matter which is
emphasized. And this was undoubtedly why (beside its non-theological
foundation) Pufendorf’s more perceptive religious critics
resisted it and often accused him of Hobbism, and why in turn his
secular adherents were not alienated by the deity lingering in the
background.
3.5 Types of Duties
Toward the end of his discussion of the natural law’s main
principle, Pufendorf joins Hobbes in subsuming international (
ius
gentium
) under natural law (DJN II.3.23) – which is
critical for understanding both – and makes some distinctions
that shape the rest of the work (Reibstein 1955, Seidler 2015). Like
Grotius, he contrasts “matters which the natural law disposes by
direct precept or prohibition
from those that reason has
persuaded men to institute on account of sociality, or that may be
undertaken by virtue of a license flowing directly from these
institutions – in which case they are said to have a
reductive relation
to the natural law” (DJN II.3.22;
Pufendorf 1994a, p. 156; emphasis added). More formatively, he divides
the law’s injunctions – loosely reflecting the divisions
of the natural state – into those toward God (
adversus
Deum
), toward ourselves (
adversus seipsum
), and toward
other humans (
adversus alios homines
). The first category is
treated separately in the pedagogically oriented DO (I.4), written
while Pufendorf was fighting charges of atheism in Lund. However, DJN
(II.4.3–4, III.4.4) folds it into the second group, particularly
the law’s (i.e., God’s) command that we cultivate our
minds by developing appropriate beliefs about God through careful
consideration of the supposedly convincing arguments of natural
theology – a strategy that recalls the difficulties noted above.
The third category’s precepts regarding other humans are divided
into absolute and hypothetical injunctions, the former obligating all
men and women as such, whatever their status, and the latter –
as in the direct/reductive distinction above – presupposing
certain states or institutions introduced by them (DJN II.3.24).
Hypothetical injunctions are also distinguished from positive civil
laws that may appeal to them for justification, even if based on
particular states’ advantage or specific legislators’
volitions. The three most important human institutions governed by
hypothetical laws of nature are speech, dominion over things
(property) and price (the valuation of things), and human sovereignty
(including the civil state) – the subjects of DJN IV–V and
VI–VIII. Book II concludes with three more chapters treating the
various duties toward ourselves (II.4), the right and limits of
self-defense (II.5), and the right of necessity (II.6).
Before turning to various categories of hypothetical duties in Book
III, Pufendorf examines several absolute requirements toward other
humans. The first is the prime natural law directive – also
found in Grotius and Hobbes – without which social life could
not exist: that no one should injure another and, if they have, that
reparation should be made (DJN III.1). Second, since injury can be
done to others not only by damaging their bodies or things, but also
their self-esteem, humans must show mutual respect and treat one
another as natural equals: for “one cannot lead a social life
with someone by whom one is not esteemed at least as a man,
…” (DJN III.2.1; Pufendorf 1994a, p. 159). The basis of
this requirement is not human nature regarded metaphysically (or
transcendentally) as an absolute value, but a so-called equality of
right or law (
ius
) consisting merely of our joint obligation
(per natural law) to cultivate a social life (DJN III.2.2; (Fiorillo
2013a, Saastamoinen 2010, Haakonssen 2011). Human moral equality so
conceived also leads Pufendorf to reject the notion of natural
slavery, even though he allows its compatibility with certain kinds of
contractual subjection in both pre-civil and civil society (DJN
III.2.8–9). Third, beside observing the minimalist requirements
not to injure or insult others, Pufendorf notes, one must also seek to
benefit them, “so that I am glad that others who share my nature
also live upon this earth” (DJN III.3.1; Pufendorf 1994a, p.
165). This introduces the important distinction between perfect and
imperfect duties, the latter consisting of so-called duties of
humanity which, though owed in the same sense as perfect duties,
cannot be compelled. There are a number of interesting discussions
here, addressing the right of passage “for legitimate
reasons” (
justas causas
, DJN III.3.5), the duty of
hospitality, and the right of immigration – some of which recur
in the fuller treatment of international law at the end of DJN VIII.
Duties of humanity often depend on special circumstances. Thus,
Pufendorf could consistently approve of Frederick William’s
liberal (and self-serving) pro-Huguenot immigration policy in
Brandenburg while supporting Charles XI’s tighter restrictions
in Sweden (KVS 1995e, pp. 472, 505; Habitu §54, 2002c, pp.
118–21). Moreover, in the immediate context, he disagrees with
Vitoria (DJN III.3.9) by limiting the so-called right of commerce,
including territorial access for such purposes, especially as it was
used by Europeans in their conquest of America (Cavallar 2002, 2008;
Hunter 2007a).
Since imperfect duties of humanity do not suffice for maintaining
social relations, particularly those involving precise mutual
expectations, Pufendorf introduces (DJN III.4) another class of
absolute duties arising from pacts among individuals. The natural law
stipulates no specifics here but merely commands that we enter into
some such consensual arrangements, since without them sociality would
be hampered and humans remain in the natural state. Pact-generated
obligations are both adventitious, or based upon some antecedent human
deed responding to circumstance, and perfect in the sense of specific
and compellable. They arise from either unilateral promises or
bilateral agreements, and they create perfect rights (i.e., justified
expectations of exact performance) in others (DJN I.7.7). It appears
here that Pufendorf is an obligation theorist in that rights derive
from obligations (DJN III.5.1; cf. VIII.3.5), yet there are also
rights without corresponding obligations; that is, correlativity
exists, but incompletely (Mautner 1991, 1989). He also rejects once
more Hobbes’s notion of a right to all things and maintains that
rights claims to natural objects must rest, if they are to have
normative force, on the express or tacit consent of others (DJN
III.5.2–3); that is, they arise out of social interaction and
are not presupposed by it. Given its importance for the development of
human social life, five more chapters are devoted to the topic of
promises and pacts: on their nature, subject-matter, types, and
conditionality, as well as the sorts of individual and collective
agents capable of generating consent-based obligations by promising or
agreeing with one another. The discussion as a whole is fundamental to
the hypothetical laws of nature articulated in the rest of the work,
in the context of various consensually created adventitious human
institutions.
3.6 Speech, Property, and Commerce
Since humans’ emergence from the pre-cultural and pre-civil
states of nature is neither strictly concomitant or parallel, nor
sequential, the development of DJN after Book III cannot be strictly
continuous in either a topical or historical sense. Rather, it falls
into two partially overlapping sectors. Books IV–V deal with
human efforts to leave the natural state of need
(
indigentia
), while Books VI–VIII address the problem
of security created by weakness (
imbecillitas
). Both require
the creation of new, complex, and formally organized kinds of human
cooperation that address both the growing diversity and inconsistency
of human desires, and the increase in human numbers.
Fundamental to both developments, however, is the institution of human
speech and the rules that make it effective, or possible (DJN IV.1;
Hochstrasser 2000). For without speech in the sense of symbolic
communication human sociality would remain at a primitive and
unsustainable level, in that the terms of human cooperation could not
be articulated and agreed upon. Conversely – and hinting at the
general providentialism that Pufendorf substitutes for traditional
metaphysical teleology – speech, or the communication of thought
to others via sound, would be “of hardly any use” without
a social life (DJN IV.1.1). Unlike natural signs or associations
(e.g., dawn, smoke, groans), speech is an artificial construct of
humans over time: learned rather than congenital, and arbitrary or
accidental instead of naturally uniform, it is a clear instance of the
willful imposition of moral entities upon the world so as to give rise
to new obligations. (DJN IV.1.4–5) Its utility depends upon
consent (tacit or express) and on the concomitant requirements of
consistency and veracity, which are both instrumentally and –
insofar as humans are obligated to be social – morally
necessary. However, though humans are bound by the general conventions
of language and by the requirement of not lying to one another, they
retain a certain flexibility of action based on others’ varying
right to know one’s thoughts, and the actual consequences of
such revelations. Thus Pufendorf distinguishes between lies
(
mendacia
) and untruths (
falsiloquia
) and also
allows for noninjurious deceptions (DJN IV.1.9). This proviso applies
not only to everyday life and its “harmless arts of simulation
and dissimulation,” but also to the realm of politics and
international relations, where total candor or naivete may be
counterproductive and defeat the injunctions of sociality (DJN
IV.1.17; Martin 2009). Pufendorf returns to it repeatedly in
discussing the duties of (esp. contemporary) historians (Seidler 1997,
Piirimäe 2008).
It is clear in this as well as other discussions how Pufendorf’s
anthropological and social realism allows or actually requires a
certain flexibility in articulating context-specific obligations of
the natural law, even or especially within the particular human
institutions created to enact sociality. It is because of this
flexibility and consequent slipperiness of language that he goes on to
treat of oaths (DJN IV.2) which, presuming “human diffidence,
infidelity, ignorance, and impotence” (DJN IV.2.2), are a
special means for assuring others (through associated divine or civil
sanctions) of the reliability of our speech acts and the promises and
pacts that rest thereon. Of course, since oaths themselves involve
presumptions and tacit conditions arising from the nature of
particular cases (DJN IV.2.14), they too may require further
regulation. Thus, like other human institutions based on pacts, the
rules of speech both antedate civil sovereignty but come eventually to
depend on it in certain ways as well.
A fundamental use of speech is to regulate humans’ use of
external things by appeal to the right of appropriation or dominion.
The latter rests on things’ necessity or utility for humans, and
their presumed (and divinely intended) availability for man’s
use because of these features (DJN IV.3.1–3). Property
designates a moral quality imposed on things, and it has a moral
effect on other humans rather than (or beside) a physical impact on
the things or animals owned (DJN IV.4.1). That is, it is a social
relationship among humans (thus, solitary Adam’s relation to
things was not ownership per se, and could not be transmitted) based
on express or tacit agreements that may vary according to
circumstances, so long as the ends of human sociality are served (DJN
IV.4.4). Before or without such agreements, worldly objects are in a
state of negative community, meaning that they belong to no one in
particular but lie open for anyone to use as needed (DJN
IV.4.2–3, 4.13).
While Pufendorf acknowledges a kind of primitive community within
family units, under the aegis of the father, he distinguishes this
from positive communion in the sense of common ownership (Buckle
1991). Both this and private dominion, or property properly speaking,
arise gradually with the proliferation and dispersion of family units,
as humans and their needs multiply (DJN IV.4.12). For under such
conditions it becomes necessary to distinguish mine from thine through
certain exclusionary conventions, if quarrels are to be avoided.
Typically (but optionally), humans agree to a right of first occupancy
or direct use, limited by the proviso of actual utility and the
ability to defend what is occupied (DJN IV.6.3) – though this
does not suffice for ownership without consent. Some things like the
open ocean may (or can) not be owned, and so peaceful navigation
thereon “belongs to everyone and is free.” However, other
kinds of exclusive restrictions, such as unequal trade relationships
among nations, are permitted, and “that vaunted freedom of trade
does not prevent a state from favoring its own citizens over
outsiders” (DJN IV.5.9–10). Also, since property is a
moral relationship rather than a physical quality, the same things may
be subject to different types of overlapping ownership (DJN IV.4.2).
Dominion need not be exclusive, and humans may grant others a perfect
or imperfect right over their possessions. Indeed, they may be
obligated to do so (DJN IV.8).
Since owned objects serve different uses and are not equally valued by
everyone, their exchange requires a common measure of comparison to
determine their so-called moral quantity, or price (DJN
V.1.1–2). Price is either ordinary or eminent, the latter
determined by money as an independent, or objective, unit of value.
Money is explicitly created to serve the ends of exchange among both
individuals and states, and without it commercial pacts, or contracts,
regarding both goods and services are inconceivable (DJN V.2.4). While
civil rulers have the authority to regulate property relationships in
their realms (particularly specific forms of acquisition like hunting
and fishing), and trade with outsiders, they are less free to
determine the relative price of things since such arbitrariness would
disrupt economic exchange, especially interstate commerce (DJN IV.6.5;
V.1.14). In general, sovereign determinations are less apt or useful
in pre- or non-civil institutions that relieve human need, than in
regard to those that insure human security – if these can be
distinguished. Nonetheless, economic tools like contracts may need a
civil sanction to insure their reliability and thus efficacy, and
rulers may regulate property insofar as it affects the state’s
basic security interests and welfare – not only by taxation and
eminent domain but also through controls on foreign trade and on the
growth of luxury (e.g., sumptuary laws), whereby the state’s
economic strength and independence are affected (DJN VII.4.7, VIII.5;
Saeter 1996, Gaertner 2005, Young 2008, Skinner 1995, Seidler 2018).
4. Political Philosophy
4.1 Pre-Civil Societies
Like physical bodies, the moral body of the state is substantively
composed of lesser members, particularly the simple and thus primary
associations (
collegia
) of marriage, family, and household
(DJN VI.1.1). In their reproductive, rearing, and economic functions,
these basic societies mainly address the problem of human want or
need, though they also offer a minimal level of security. Their
existence shows that social cooperation is not suddenly imposed on
isolated human beings with the creation of states, but that the latter
is an additional form of association introduced to protect and
maintain already existing social units. Despite the natural
inclinations that induce individuals to form or enter them, these
proto-civil arrangements are, like states, based on agreements, and
they exhibit authority relations more or less analogous to civil
sovereignty (DJN VI.2.11). The latter becomes necessary only when
pre-civil societies increase in size, number, and complexity to the
point where their interactions become dysfunctional and security
problems unmanageable. As in the case of other moral entities that are
superimposed on one another, states do not replace pre-civil societies
but only protect, order, and – under certain conditions –
utilize them. At the same time, especially in the case of other types
of sub-state associations such as churches, they may also liberate
individuals from them (by divorcing civil from religious authority,
and allowing religious diversity in the state). (See Seidler
2002.)
4.1.1 Marriage
Since it regulates reproduction, without which human society would
cease to exist, the institution of marriage is “the foundation
of social life” (DJN VI.1.7; Dufour 1972, Ehrle 1952). Humans
are obligated to enter it, though only in a general way that
presupposes capacity, opportunity, and other facilitating conditions.
Despite being commanded by God – like other natural law
obligations – its immediate origins lie in each instance in a
consensual pact between basically equal partners (DJN VI.1.12). This
holds even where a woman’s (express or tacit) consent –
like terms of captivity in general – follows upon (a just) war
(DJN VI.1.9, 1.12; VI.3.5–6). Though its end differs from that
of the state (reproduction vs. security), the marital unification of
wills may establish a hierarchical, quasi-sovereignty relationship
between spouses, one of whom agrees to submit to the other’s
authority; on the other hand, marriage may have the character of an
“unequal confederation,” which also requires diverse but
mutual performance (i.e., command and obedience; DJN VI.1.11). What is
impermissible in both cases and institutions, however, because of its
supposed dysfunctionality for governance, is a divided command or two
heads.
This forces a choice upon Pufendorf’s contractual
egalitarianism, which is tempered here by his material assumptions
about the “preeminence” of the husband’s sex, and
about women’s allegedly unreasonable demand for additional
responsibilities. These are not absolute pronouncements, however, but
conclusions of the “ruling prudence” that is the
“pleasant sister of natural law”; that is, they rest upon
an empirical, pragmatic assessment of spouses’ respective
abilities and burdens (DJN VI.1.11,18). It is important to recall in
this context the difference between modern and medieval natural law,
and that Pufendorf does not conceive human nature in essentialist
terms but rather generalizes (rightly or wrongly) from experience.
That is, apart from his personal presuppositions, his is an empirical
and not a metaphysical argument, and this makes it both circumstantial
and corrigible. To dismiss it out of hand ironically risks reaffirming
the very approach that he rejected (in general), and to overlook the
flexibility and liberatory potential of his conception of natural law
(Drakopolou 2013).
Besides, Pufendorf reassures, in marriages and states alike,
sovereignty does not exclude the possibility of mutual affection, and
spouses do not command each other in all respects but only those that
serve the institution’s fundamental end. Thus, matters like the
disposition of a wife’s dowry and other assets depend on the
stipulations of the original marriage agreement (DJN VI.1.11), much
like the preliminary constraints imposed upon limited civil
sovereignty by a state’s fundamental laws. Pufendorf also
extends his analysis into the controversial subject of polygamy
– which he deemed rationally elusive and sometimes permissible
(DJN VI.1.16–18; Vogel 1991) – and into the topic of
divorce, where he qualifies Milton’s views on the subject (DJN
VI.1.24; Palladini 2001). These and other discussions are historically
and circumstantially embedded, which accounts for their considerable
length and detail, especially when compared with shorter treatments in
other early modern authors like Hobbes and Locke. Textual comparisons
with these can be useful and enlightening (Sreedhar 2014), especially
if historical and philosophical contexts are also kept in view
(Doyé 2012, Hull 1996, Buchholz 1988, Rinkens 1971, Dufour
1972).
4.1.2 Family
One human institution generates and qualifies another as the parental
role supervenes on that of marital partner. Here Pufendorf follows
Hobbes in holding that mere generation cannot ground parental
authority (just as place of birth alone cannot ground patriotism), and
that this depends instead on a tacit pact based on utility (DJN
VI.2.2). Children supposedly assent to their subjection in order to
survive, and because otherwise the beneficial ends of parenthood,
which include the rearing, socializing, and civic education of
offspring, cannot be attained. Moreover, he concurs, though mothers
have primary authority over children in the state of nature where
parents are roughly equal, fathers typically acquire supremacy through
marriage pacts, which may be dictated by civil laws (DJN
VI.2.4–5). As in the spousal relationship and for similar
reasons, parents cannot be equally authoritative or sovereign
vis-a-vis their children, but one or the other must prevail. Though
this is usually the male, Pufendorf excepts Amazons and contemporary
queens in whom the civil sovereignty reposes for dynastic reasons, and
whose husbands are not kings but mere “spouses of queens.”
(DJN VI.2.5) Also, like marital authority, parental power is limited
by the institution’s end and normally excludes the right of life
and death, and the ability to void grown children’s marriages.
(DJN VI.2.14) It ceases when children come of age and are emancipated,
though (as in the case of emigration, DJN VIII.11.3–4) it may be
extended beyond that point because of special circumstances, including
other pacts. Children always owe their parents imperfect duties of
equity and gratitude (DJN VI.2.11).
4.1.3 Household
Herilic or master-slave relationships are similar to but stricter than
parental ties, and they have no natural expiration point. They too are
based on express or tacit pacts, with no natural basis beside the
qualifying suitability of some persons to rule and others to be ruled
(DJN VI.3.1–2) – which, alone, is insufficient to justify
them. Pufendorf conceives them as sovereignty- rather than as
property-relationships (DJN VI.3.7), strictly speaking, and regards
slaves not as things but as “perpetual mercenaries” (DJN
VI.3.4) who always retain an “intrinsic liberty of the
will” (DJN VI.3.10). Slavery (or servitude – the category
is wider or more diverse than often acknowledged) does not extinguish
the laws of humanity or erase all traces of humans’ original
equality, even though it is possible for them to bargain away
(permanently) their freedom to command themselves (DJN VI.3.9). Even
the offspring of slaves may be retained in that status, especially
when it has been entered through war, although humanity (vs. right)
favors their liberation. States may regulate herilic relationships
like marital and parental ties, for appropriate reasons, even though
they often do not interfere. Slavery may be ended by manumission,
banishment, a failure to specify the status of slaves in one’s
will, and – notably – by putting a slave into chains
(except for a crime, or as punishment). In the last case and any other
unjustified deprivation of bodily freedom, a slave is released from
his initial, pact-based obligation, which depends on reciprocity:
“For there is no pact unless contractors trust each other, and
faith cannot be violated where it does not exist.” That is,
physical bonds replace or sublate moral ones, and in such a case a
slave is free to go (i.e., run away) (DJN VI.3.6, 3.11). These reasons
are similar to those why the civil bond between ruler and ruled may be
broken.
4.2 The State
Pufendorf’s political philosophy or doctrine of the state,
including the latter’s internal and external functions, is
continuous and consistent with his ethics; in fact, they are not
really distinct. Both rest on the same natural law foundation, namely
the sociality law which regulates not only pre-civil relations,
institutions, and societies but also the civil condition needed to
secure them. As thoroughly social beings who are incapable of living
alone, humans are subject to sociality’s requirements at all
stages of their lives, both temporally and organizationally, and the
establishment of political authority does not leave morality and its
obligations behind but rather facilitates and extends their reach. The
tempered realism of the political sphere is not a forced abandonment
of moral norms but an articulation of the natural law’s demands
amid the increasing complexities of collective human existence,
including its inevitable constraints, exclusions, and compromises. In
Pufendorf’s natural law theory, politics is a form of social
ethics.
4.2.1 The Origin of the State
Speaking generally (since the formation of individual states varies
greatly), the moral entity of ‘the state’ is self-imposed
by humans at the command of natural law when their pre-civil marital,
parental, and particularly herilic associations – as well as
other pact-based institutions such as property – become
dysfunctional because of multiplying conflicts that lead increasingly
to the unjustified use of force and, thus, reciprocal injury and
insecurity. It is a defensive and precautionary response to such
emergent conditions, a kind of cooperative scheme
(
conspiratio
) or mutual protection association created as
needed against the growing threat posed by other human beings (DJN
VII.2.1–2). Contra Aristotle, the state is not a natural or
ideal stage of human development emerging spontaneously from
humans’ desire to live together (DJN VII.1.2–3), but an
adventitious, willed self-help device broadly enjoined by natural law
in either or both a prudential (i.e., recommended by sound reason) or
deontological (i.e., commanded by God) sense (DJN VII.3.2). It is not
required to eliminate human need (
indigentia
) in the
pre-cultural natural state, since cities and other forms of
association usually suffice for that (DJN VII.1.3 and 6; Brett 2011).
Rather it secures these social arrangements and their cultural gains
in the context of increased human numbers, relative scarcity and
competition, growing disagreements, and the ensuing insecurity that
comes from the interaction of individually weak and imperfectly social
beings.
State formation is explicitly driven by fear, and there is ample
reference to human wickedness, self-concern, and a willingness to
injure in Pufendorf’s sketch of the pre-civil condition (DJN
VII.1–2). Still, his comments are qualified even here, in
opposition to Hobbes, and they do not amount to an anthropological
claim about the exclusive selfishness of all human beings –
which is not needed for the argument (DJN VII.1.5, 7–8). In
fact, the discussion of pre-civil conditions and institutions clearly
tempers such pessimism. For while those arrangements rely on formal
promises and pacts, they are also induced by and certainly compatible
with mutual affection, a desire for friendship, and the enjoyment of
conviviality (DJN VII.1.5, 2.4; VIII.4.3, 6.2; II.2.7, 3.16). To be
sure, such means and motives become increasingly incapable of
maintaining them, as the complex feelings regulating smaller, simpler,
and more intimate human interactions evolve into a cruder and colder
psychology of scale among composite moral persons or groups. That is,
with the reduction of familiarity, predictability, and commonality of
purpose comes a sort of primitivizing of motives in the direction of
fear. Still, Pufendorf’s state is not built on a thick,
essentialist, or teleological (philosophical or theological)
anthropology – even of a negative sort – but on an
empirical, historical, or realistic assessment of actual human
affairs. This means both that the state’s minimalist function as
a mutual protection agency may not be controlled or overridden by
other, substantive (e.g., religious, ethical) ends, but also that,
since fear does not necessarily eliminate other human motives but only
suppresses or distorts or overrules them, the state as guarantor of
mutual security may actually allow these to function (again) in their
proper (subordinate) contexts.
4.2.2 Contractualism
Beside its sovereignty, what distinguishes Pufendorf’s state
from other pact-based institutions is its size (DJN VII.2.2) –
that is, its numbers must suffice for security in particular social
and historical circumstances – and, more importantly, its manner
of formation. Conceptually, it owes its origin to two agreements and
an intervening decree (DJN VII.2.7–8). An initial contract of
association occurs when members of a multitude, or the would-be
citizens (in practice, family-fathers or patriarchs, who are the
primary or direct citizens: DJN VII.2.20, 5.12), agree with one
another to bond together for mutual security. This requires the
accession of all (full or formal) members of the resultant group, who
consent to it either absolutely or conditionally depending on whether
they agree individually to bind themselves to any form of state
selected by the majority, or only to a certain, preapproved form
satisfactory to themselves. In either case, the band (
coetus
)
thus constituted still lacks unity and has only “the rudiments
and beginnings of a state” (DJN VII.2.7; Pufendorf 1994a, p.
212), although it suffices to prevent an immediate return to the state
of nature if the second pact is temporarily suspended, as during an
interregnum (DJN VII.7.6–7, VIII.11.1).
The second pact follows the selection (via the pragmatic expedient of
majority vote; see Pasquino 2010, Schwartzberg 2008) of the specific
form of state to be instituted (monarchy, aristocracy, or democracy),
and through it each citizen of the future state subjects himself to
the specific governing agent thereby established. It is needed to
prevent the random defection and individual exceptionalism that
threaten all pre-civil agreements (DJN VII.2.3, 10), including the
first contract. At this stage or level, the individual contractors
unite their wills through separate promises of obedience to a new
moral persona equipped with distinctive (i.e., not simply transferred)
rights and obligations, and capable of using their combined strength
to discipline, compel, and thus govern effectively (DJN VII.2.5, 3.4,
8.5; cf. VI.1.12; Boucher 1998, Skinner 2002). Civil subjection is
analogous to herilic subjection or slavery, though more focused in
intent, more limited in scope, and – because of reciprocal
promises between governors and governed – potentially sublatable
in narrowly defined and (thinks Pufendorf) avoidable circumstances
(DJN VII.3.1, 2.10; Seidler 1996). Moreover, in combining a title to
command with the strength to sanction or compel, it also recalls the
general structure and rationale of the moral obligation that enjoins
humans to constitute it in the first place (cf. DJN VII.3.1, 2.13;
I.6.9, 6.12; and Section 3.2 above).
4.2.3 Sovereignty
Like Bodin and Hobbes, Pufendorf identified sovereignty
(
imperium
) as the “vivifying and sustaining soul”
of the state. It is a new moral quality that emerges from the
respective commitments of rulers and ruled, consisting of the
former’s right to command and the latter’s duty to obey.
(DJN VII.3.1–2: Pufendorf 1994a, pp. 217–18; VII.4.12;
Holland 2012) Like other souls, as it were, sovereignty comes from God
(as author of the natural law), though only indirectly in this case,
or through the instrumentality of reasoning human beings. Thus,
throughout Book VII of DJN Pufendorf rejects the arguments of J. F.
Horn (
Politicorum pars architectonica de civitate
[1664]),
the German Filmer. Natural law bestows sovereignty on no one form of
government or on specific individuals or groups; instead, such
decisions are made by human contractors in particular circumstances.
It is always required, however, that sovereignty be supreme in the
sense that there be no superior or equivalent powers within the state.
Also, sovereignty cannot be divided, since that would fragment the
unity of will that undergirds the state as an effective authority (DJN
VII.4.11). Accordingly, all governing functions, including
legislative, judicial, penal, economic, and war-related powers must
ultimately reside in the same persona or agency. Otherwise (as in the
Holy Roman Empire whose political diseases Pufendorf diagnosed in
The Present State of Germany
(Monz.) the state would have two
or more heads and, by reproducing the conflicts of the pre-civil
condition, would invite its own destruction.
4.2.4 Forms of State
States where sovereignty is unified – whatever be their form
(monarchy, aristocracy, democracy) – are called regular, and
those where it is divided irregular (DJN VII.5.2, 5.14–15).
Irregularity always weakens a state, but each form also has its own
difficulties and weaknesses. Pufendorf does not in principle prefer
one regular form over another: God is the author of free states
(democracies) and monarchies alike (DJN VII.5.5), and sovereignty or
majesty belongs equally to all states and not just to monarchies (DJN
VII.3.3). However, humans incline differently toward particular forms
of state (DJN VII.5.11), and it is up to them to decide which ones to
implement for themselves (DJN VII.3.2). In fact, the choice appears to
be prudential in nature, since certain forms of state may require
specific human dispositions to function effectively (DJN VII.6.5), and
some forms may be more suited for particular settings. Thus, large
territories with scattered populations are better ruled as monarchies,
while smaller regions or city-states can be governed well as
democracies (DJN VII.5.22). More generally, monarchy may be more
efficient because of the simple logistics of human association (DJN
VII.5.9). Beside such forms and conditions, each type of state is also
prone to other faults or illnesses peculiar to itself, which Pufendorf
distinguishes into “vices of men” and “vices of
status” (DJN VII.5.10). The former obtain, for instance, when
(in a monarchy) rulership goes to someone unqualified for that role,
and the latter when (in a democracy) citizens are too self-assertive
and unwilling to compromise. The fact remains that even though states
are a remedy for human weakness and imperfection, as human constructs
they always remain an imperfect one (DJN VII.5.22).
This problem cannot be avoided or lessened by mixing forms of state, a
traditional expedient (Riklin 2006, Scattola 2009b, Zurbuchen 2009)
that Pufendorf rejects because of the irregularities it produces. For
mixing yields either an entity that is no state at all, because it is
held together by a mere agreement (without subjection), or one that
approximates a system of independent states, else something
‘monstrous’ in between (DJN VII.5.12–13). Pufendorf
does allow, though, for a distinction between forms of state and forms
of administration. Thus, a monarch may utilize executive mechanisms
that are aristocratic or democratic in nature, and similarly for other
forms of state (DJN VII.5.1, 5.13). The crucial defining factor in
each instance is the unity and locus of ultimate authority, not how
its commands are executed or policies implemented. Such arrangements
differ from so-called systems of (sovereign) states, which themselves
exhibit regular and irregular forms depending on the way their
collective authority is exercised. By discussing them Pufendorf
extends his analysis to the international sphere (DJN
VII.5.17–21; see Seidler 2011).
4.2.5 Absolute and Limited Sovereignty
Contra Hobbes, Pufendorf allows that supreme sovereignty (
summum
imperium
) may be either absolute or limited (DJN VII.6.7). The
former obtains where a sovereign accepts his (her, or its) authority
with no conditions attached, the latter where citizens’
submission depends on the sovereign’s initial acceptance of
certain terms, such as an existing state’s fundamental laws.
These can be violated by the eventual sovereign, making his actions
injurious or illegitimate (DJN VII.8.2–4, 6.10), even though
subjects are not typically – except
in extremis
–
in a position to deny him obedience for this reason because it would
undermine the important end of sovereignty altogether (DJN
VII.8.5–6). Given human imperfections, Pufendorf clearly favors
limited sovereignty; however, and for the same reasons, while he
criticizes the abuse of absolute sovereignty he also criticizes
irrational fear thereof (DJN VII.6.8–13). Again, there is no
universal recommendation but all depends on what is needed in
particular historical circumstances where such choices present
themselves.
4.2.6 State and Church
The state or sovereign necessarily controls all sub-state collectives,
including economic, political, and religious associations, especially
if they compete with it for citizens’ allegiance (DJN
VII.2.21–24). Though piety is a personal matter between the
deity and individual believers, its official mediation by ecclesial
entities or churches, which also direct and organize human actions,
has a worldly impact that may interfere with the state’s
functions (which are also divinely enjoined) – as Pufendorf
argued by reference to the history of Catholicism and the
papacy’s role in European affairs (Einl., ch. 12, 2013; also
[1839, 1714, 1691b]). Therefore, sovereigns have the right (and
obligation) to regulate religious organizations, to examine beliefs,
and even to foster an official religion – though only to insure
compatibility with political order (DJN VII.4.11, 9.4). In fact, like
public schools (if they do not merely perpetuate scholastic
subtleties), religion may also aid the process of civic formation
– which is required because states are adventitious moral
entities devised by humans for a particular purpose, and because
(good) citizens are not born but made (DJN VII.1.3–4). However,
since they are disparate institutions regulating different moral
personae (citizens, believers), neither state nor church exists
primarily to serve the other’s purposes. The state’s
general authority regarding religion, and its sovereignty over all
religious groups alike, also creates room for the toleration of
religious minorities and thus restrains destabilizing confessional
conflict (Seidler 2002, Zurbuchen 2013, Lehmann 2013, Palladini
1997b). Though Pufendorf had not yet arrived at Christian
Thomasius’ notion of a deconfessionalized state (Hunter 2007),
his historical awareness of religion’s impact on government, and
its frequent contribution to political factionalism, made him wary of
independent religious institutions and inclined to favor state
oversight. In any case, since they issue from the same warranting
deity, he held that ultimately true politics and true (religious)
doctrine cannot conflict (DJN VII.4.8, 4.11).
4.2.7 Civil Law
Despite its natural law foundation, a state’s positive laws will
only partially overlap with natural law. That is, since its purpose is
not to make humans perfect but secure, only those natural laws without
which peace among citizens would be impossible should also become
civil laws (DJN VIII.1.1, III.4.6). In fact, by focusing on the
requirements of human association rather than on personal formation,
the sociality principle makes Pufendorf a legal minimalist more
generally, so that even where the natural law is silent or indifferent
“civil laws should not sanction more things than conduce to the
good of the citizens [as such] and the state” (DJN VII.9.5;
Pufendorf 1994a, p. 242). Besides, and within this narrow focal area,
it also grants legislators considerable discretion or flexibility of
application. Thus, even though civil laws should not explicitly
contravene natural law, it is sometimes excusable if they redefine or
“overlook” (
dissimulare
) certain practices
– like theft, dueling, and tacitly accepted cuckoldry –
for which “the condition of the times and the genius of a
people” do not provide a current remedy (DJN VIII.1.3). Such
practical adjustments are evident throughout Pufendorf’s
detailed discussions of state laws in DJN VIII – regarding
punishment, social status (esteem), property, and war – which
are strongly prudentialist, consequentialist, and realist in
character. They evince not a substantive moralism but the same
flexible ‘reason-of-state’ approach that also guides his
thinking about inter-state relations. Indeed, through their common
grounding in the sociality principle, natural, civil, and
international law are in continuity and in dialogue with one another
– though in a complex and sometimes untidy way (DJN II.3.23).
That is, though as a broad divine injunction natural law is presumed
to be ultimately consistent, in practice (as specifically interpreted
by particular humans) it often appears less so; for its demands must
always be articulated in full view of not only human psychology but
also the concrete settings in which human action occurs. (Thus, as in
the case of immigration [section 3.5 above], Pufendorf could condemn
the 1640s English revolution, while approving that in 1688. See
Seidler 2001.)
4.2.8 Punishment
This requirement is also evident in Pufendorf’s long discussion
of the sovereign’s right to punish (DJN VIII.3, Hüning
2009b). Punishment presupposes a superior, and so (in contrast to
Locke) it cannot occur in either the pre-civil or the international
state of nature (DJN VIII.3.1–2, 3.7). Of course, both
individuals and states have a right to defend themselves or wage
defensive (and, in limited circumstances, preemptive) war, but neither
of these is to be construed as punishment strictly speaking. The
latter is, instead, a means of social control available only to
sovereigns for the specific purpose of restraint, deterrence, and
reform (DJN VIII.3.9). In their hands, moreover, it is more future-
than past-oriented, with the latter being important only for the sake
of the former: that is, one should not pointlessly impose evil on
someone, even if guilty, if the deed cannot be undone or the damage
repaired, for he remains after all our conspecific or fellow human
being (
cognato
) (DJN VIII.3.8). Those who have injured
another certainly owe a duty of reparation, as well as assurances
about future behavior, but they are under no obligation to submit to
punishment (DJN VIII.3.4; see end of 4.1.3 above), which is imposed
for purely consequentialist reasons. Joining Hobbes, Pufendorf
dismisses revenge as a “vain and unreasonable” motive (DJN
VIII.3.8) for punishment, and he also dismisses Selden’s
“satisfaction, purgation, or expiation” (DJN VIII.3.12) as
unnecessary or meaningless notions. Moreover, he holds that penalties
are not “owed to” or “deserved by” criminals,
who are unlikely to assert such a right (DJN VIII.3.5, 3.15).
Instead,a sovereign’s resort to punishment should be guided by
state interest (as, in the case of a parent, by the interests of the
family: DJN VIII.3.10), which also determines the quantity and quality
of punishment needed (DJN VIII.3.23–24). The latter should never
be excessive but guided by the actual advantages to be gained (DJN
VII.9.6–7). In some cases, punishment may even be foregone
altogether if the interest of the state demands it (DJN VIII.3.14,
16). This is because punishment is an instance of neither distributive
nor commutative (expletive) justice, but a type of administrative
sanction recommended by “prudence … conjoined with the
duty to rule others” (DJN VIII.3.5).
In sum, Pufendorf’s analysis of punishment as a whole reflects
the positive and (re)constructive attitude of the law of nature, in
both pre- and post-civil conditions, particularly its injunctions to
forgive, to accept apologies and reparations, and basically so to act
as always to further and facilitate sociality (“inasmuch as [we]
can”), rather than to frustrate or make it impossible among
human beings as we actually find them (DJN V.13.1; II.3.15, Pufendorf
1994a, p. 152). As such, it appears far removed from more absolutist
or categorical views of justice, such as the well-known statement (of
Kant in
The Metaphysics of Morals
[
Die Metaphysik der
Sitten
, 1797]) that a civil society must, before dissolving
itself, execute every convicted murderer remaining in its prisons
– a contrast that reveals well the gulf separating
Pufendorf’s natural law theory from essentialist or Platonizing
views (such as Leibniz’s) that challenged, and the Critical
philosophy that eventually replaced it (Hunter 2001, 2003a).
4.3 Natural Law and History
Pufendorf’s natural law thinking developed in close interaction
with his views on other subjects such as history, religion, and
international relations; that is, his roles as academic philosopher,
court historian, and political apologist were only formally and not
intellectually distinct (Seidler 2015). This is as evident in the
seminal reflections of his early
Collegium Anthologicum
lectures (in KVS 1995e, pp. 2–86) as it is in his later works.
Thus, the 1667 treatise on the Holy Roman Empire (Monz.) not only
studied its concrete history and institutions but also examined the
importance of sovereignty and state form, the tension between civil
and ecclesiastical authority, and the challenge of foreign relations
that emerged from these. Pufendorf’s so-called works on religion
(Habitu; Feciale; Einl. [1691b, 1714, 1839]) engaged the same topics,
as well as associated questions about religious unification and
toleration, in the context of the early modern confessional state
(Parkin and Stanton 2013; Döring 1998; Zurbuchen 1999, 1996,
1991; Hüning 2002b). Even Pufendorf’s concretely situated
and apparently partisan defenses of the Swedish interest (Discussio,
Occas.) – which were sometimes regarded as merely contingent or
opportunistic productions – exhibit the challenge (for
particular sovereigns and their historians) of applying the natural
law’s general injunctions to specific historical circumstances.
Most obviously, perhaps, his explicitly historical works –
including the long accounts of Sweden (Gust. Ad., C. Gust.) and of
Brandenburg (Fr. Wilh., Pufendorf 1784) that so distinguished him, but
also his famous
Introductions
(Einl. 1682, 1686b) –
give substance to and thus support his philosophical analysis of the
state (Seidler 1996 and 1997, Piirimäe 2008, Dufour 1991c,
Krawczuk 2014). To be sure, the focus here is mainly on the external
relations and negotiations of particular states. But sovereigns must
conduct these as judiciously and effectively as their states’
internal affairs, for it is useless to have internal peace if a state
is externally weak (DJN VII.4.5). The two dimensions of statecraft are
clearly linked throughout Pufendorf’s opus, which urges
sovereigns (and those who create them) to consult both long- and
short-term interests of states, distinguishing the real from the
merely apparent ones (Einl., Preface, 2013), both to avoid the
(re)emergence of an internal or external state of nature and, more
generally, to satisfy the natural law’s injunction to further
sociality among humans.
5. Influence
5.1 Literary Afterlife
Pufendorf’s (Latin) style is clear and careful, though also
sophisticated and colorful. For he not only mastered the art of
example but was also an aggressive, imaginative, and sometimes crass
polemicist when attacked – especially when cornered, when the
stakes were high, or when he deemed his opponents to be bellicose,
lazy, or intellectually dishonest. This alone assured that he was
eagerly and widely read. Many of his works – including Monz.
(1667), DJN (1672), DO (1673), Einl. (1682) – were published
repeatedly and translated into many European languages, both during
his lifetime and throughout most of the following century (Othmer
1970, Luig 1972, Denzer 1972, Laurent 1982, Seidler 2013), when they
became staples of university education. Of particular note in this
extensive publication history were the influential French translations
by Jean Barbeyrac, whose long notes to DJN and DO (including their
Lockean leanings) were partially assumed into the standard English
translations of these works (if not immediately then in later
editions), specifically those by Basil Kennet (DJN 1729) and Andrew
Tooke (DO 1735). In fact there was considerable interest in Pufendorf
in England (starting with Tyrrell and Locke – see Tyrrell 1681,
esp. pp. 236–59, and Thompson 1987), which also saw translations
of various other works, including
The Present State of
Germany
(Monz 1690, 1696),
The History of Popedom
(Einl.
[1691]), the
Introduction
(Einl. 1695),
Of the Nature and
Qualification of Religion, in Reference to Civil Society
(Habitu
1698), and
The Divine Feudal Law
(Feciale 1703). These and
other translations are currently being reissued by Liberty Fund, Inc.
as part of its
Natural Law and Enlightenment Classics
series,
and are readily available in its
Online Library of Liberty
.
(See Other Internet Resources below.) Pufendorf’s three main
natural law works (including the early EJU) were also reprinted and
retranslated in the early twentieth century as part of the Carnegie
Endowment’s
Classics of International Law
series, and
are still occasionally reissued in this form (EJU 1995a, 1995b [2009];
DJN 1995c, 1995d; DO 1995g, 1995h). However, there was never a
collective edition of Pufendorf’s works in any language, before the ongoing
Gesammelte Werke
(GW) issued by the Akademie Verlag (Walter de Gruyter). This edition includes as Vol. 1 (BW 1996) the extant correspondence which, though limited in comparison to other early moderns like Leibniz, is nonetheless very useful, especially in conjunction with the polemical
essays in
Eris Scandica
(ES 2002b), which add biographical
and literary details. The shorter works collected by Döring (KVS 1995e) are not included in GW, which does or will, however, contain Feciale
(2004), Habitu (2016), DAS (1675b), and Monz.(1667). Since the long
national histories are now easily obtainable in facsimile form or as
scans (see ZVDD and Gallica, in Other Internet Resources below), all
of Pufendorf’s known writings will soon be readily available to
scholars in some contemporary form.
5.2 18th-Century Presence
The discourse of natural law became the
lingua franca
of
18th-century moral, political, and social (including economic –
Hont 1987, 2005; Skinner 1995) thought (Haakonssen 2012; see section
2.1 above, and “Natural Law 1625–1850: Database” in
Other Internet Resources below). Pufendorf contributed much thereto by
initiating the self-referential genre of the ‘history of natural
law’, wherein he located himself in relation to Grotius, Hobbes
and other predecessors (
Sample of Controversies
[
Specimen
controversiarum
], 1678, Ch. 1: “On the Origin and Progress
of the Discipline of Natural Law”; later included in
Eris
Scandica
(ES 1686). His modest beginning was much enlarged by
Barbeyrac in “An Historical and Critical Account of the Science
of Morality …,” the Preface to his 1706 translation of
Pufendorf’s DJN (2005 [1729]), and by Pufendorf’s German
friend and disciple, Christian Thomasius, in his
Nearly Complete
History of Natural Law
(
Paulo plenior historia juris
naturalis
, 1719), as well as many others in the 18th century
(Glafey 1965 [1739]; see Hochstrasser 2000, pp. 65–71). As in
Pufendorf himself, a major theme of the genre was that of sociality
(sociability, benevolence), which was variously interpreted,
criticized, and defended in both secular and religious contexts
(Chiodi 2009, Piirimäe and Schmidt 2015). The notion’s
appeal in the British domain – where a way had been prepared by
Richard Cumberland (1632–1718, Cumberland 2005), whom Pufendorf
cited repeatedly in the 1684 edition of DJN – is demonstrated by
Gershom Carmichael’s (1672–1729) influential student
edition (1718) of Pufendorf’s
De officio
(Carmichael
2002), and by the inaugural lecture “On the Natural Sociality of
Men” (1730) of his student and successor at Glasgow, Francis
Hutcheson (1694–1746), whose thought was strongly influenced by
natural law (Hutcheson 1993, 2006, 2007). So too were many other
British moralists and social theorists, especially in the so-called
Scottish Enlightenment, including George Turnbull (1698–1748),
John Millar (1735–1801), Thomas Reid (1710–1796), and Adam
Smith (1723–1790) (Haakonssen 1996, Moore and Silverthorne 1983,
Moore 2006). Through them and others, including direct exposure to
Pufendorf’s own, often reprinted works, natural law thought also
became part of the intellectual inheritance of the American Revolution
and constitutionalism (Welzel 1952, White 1978, Augat 1985, Heideking
1995, Haakonssen 1991, Logan 2013).
On the Continent, Pufendorf’s influence was felt during the 18th
century through the so-called civil enlightenment of C. Thomasius and
his school, and through the frequent republication and study of his
own works. Their juridical approach to natural law persisted until the
end of the century, especially in German law faculties (Lestition
1989, Klippel 2009, Schröder 2010), where it provided a
counterweight to the metaphysical, perfectionist, and in a sense
neoscholastic tradition of natural law associated with Leibniz and
Christian Wolff (1679–1754) (Hunter 2007, 2003a, 2001;
Lutterbeck 2002, Haakonssen 2006, Ikadatsu 2002, Ottmann 2006, Schmidt
2007, Schneider 2001). Pufendorf himself maintained a presence not
only through his natural law works but also the historical writings,
especially the many versions of his
Introduction
(Einl.
1682), which was continually revised and appropriated by others to
suit the times, until nearly the end of the century (Seidler 2013).
Indeed, it was largely through this work and those of its editors,
commentators, and imitators, including Nikolaus Hieronymus Gundling
(1671–1729) and Johann Peter Lud[e]wig (1668–1743), that
Pufendorf entered the 18th-century discourse about the relation of
law, politics, and history, and stayed relevant as an international
theorist. His empirically grounded mix of history, philosophy, and law
led also into cameralism (Brückner 1977), into the so-called
Göttingen School (Hammerstein 1972 and 1986, Vierhaus 1987), and
to the associated discipline of
Statistik
(statistics, from
the Italian
statista
[statesman] and
ragion di
stato
), with its focus on the concrete institutions and functions
of states (Zande 2010, Valera 1986, Pasquino 1986). This included
Gottfried Achenwall (1719–1772), on whom Kant lectured for many
years during both his pre-Critical and Critical periods (Achenwall
1762, Hruschka 1986, Streidl 2000). Moreover, it underlay the
century’s legal codification schemes, which attempted still to
base positive on natural law in some sense (Hartung 1998, Ferronato
2005). In an equally broad sort of way, Pufendorf was also predecessor
to Jean-Jacques Burlamaqui (1694–1748) and Emmerich de Vattel
(1714–1767), whose respective works on natural and international
law were notable examples of the genre, albeit ones also influenced by
its Wolffian version. Moreover, Pufendorf and natural law were present
in the
Encyclopédie
(Schröder 2001, Burns 1999),
as well as in the prehistory of the French Revolution (Caradonna 2006,
Edelstein 2014). Finally, Pufendorf’s theory of the state had a
significant formative influence on specific thinkers like Rousseau,
who criticized him and other “friends of despotism” for
undermining human freedom while nonetheless borrowing heavily from his
political conceptions (McAdam 1963, Derathé 1992, Wokler 1994,
Silvestrini 2010, Douglass 2015).
5.3 Eclipse & Rediscovery
Kant’s Critical philosophy does not distinguish clearly between
the rather different streams of natural law that it is usually thought
to have surpassed (Hochstrasser 2000, Hartung 1998, Haakonssen 2006).
Indeed, when Kant arrived on the scene the two had already been
thoroughly commingled, and the discipline as a whole straddled an
uncomfortable position between the rational and the empirical. Its
situation now became increasingly precarious, as it was subjected to
epistemological and metaphysical challenges that it had not been
designed to meet, and whose purist, a priori assumptions it would
reject (Hunter 2001, 2002, 2005). Like much else, Kant effectively
folded natural law into the dialectical pre-history of his own system.
In fact, he hardly mentions it at all, since it does not fit the
formal schematic of his conception of the history of philosophy as a
conflict between dogmatic rationalism and sceptical empiricism. In
ethics, natural law is implicitly dismissed in the critique of
technical and prudential imperatives, and in political philosophy it
appears similarly wanting in the face of pure Right. To be sure,
Kant’s own views in both areas – including the notion of
categorical obligation, the historical-political mechanism of
’unsocial sociability’, and the trademark concept of
‘autonomy’ mediated by Rousseau’s General Will
– owed significant debts to Pufendorf and the voluntarist
tradition (Schneewind 1993, 2009, 2010; Kersting 2006). However, since
his system gave that problematic a new (in)significance, it did not
play an explicit role in his discussions. Kant’s sole mention of
Pufendorf (in the company of Grotius and Vattel) is a vague and
dismissive reference to the “wretched comforters”
(
leidige Tröster
) who are criticized – in the
essay on
Perpetual Peace
(
Zum ewigen Frieden
, 1795)
– for their overly flexible, empirical, and situational
treatment of the law of nations (
ius gentium
). Ironically,
that approach (including sovereigns’ resort to prudence and the
right of necessity) had previously been considered a strength, but
Kant saw it as little more than a recipe for endless war. In its
place, he substituted a universal, necessary, and absolute metaphysics
of right – albeit in a transcendental vein – precisely of
the sort that the ‘modern’ natural law theory of Hobbes
and Pufendorf had originally sought to displace because of its
pernicious social consequences.
The actual refutation or, rather, historical erasure of natural law
was the work of post-Kantian historians like C. F. Stäudlin
(1761–1826), J. G. Buhle (1763–1807), and W. G. Tennemann
(1761–1819), whose versions of the history of moral philosophy
ironically left Grotius, Pufendorf and Thomasius (Barbeyrac’s
protagonists) with only minor roles to play. Even so, natural law
remained a presence in the nineteenth century. Thus, Fichte (
The
Foundations of Natural Law
[
Grundlage des Naturrechts nach
Prinzipien der Wissenschaftslehre
, 1796–97]), Schelling
(
A New Deduction of Natural Law
[
Neue Deduction des
Naturrechts
, 1797]), and the young Hegel (
The Scientific Ways
of Treating Natural Law
[
Über die wissenschaftlichen
Behandlungsarten des Naturrechts
, 1802–3]) all published
works on “natural law” (
Naturrecht
) –
showing that the idiom remained serviceable (Klippel 1997, 2012). In
the British domain, insofar as it was not also
‘idealized’, Bentham’s vague and dismissive attitude
toward ‘natural rights’, and the comparatively
circumscribed ‘ethics’ of Mill’s utilitarianism,
found little connection with modern natural law, even through its own
eighteenth-century inheritance which that approach had helped to
shape. The rebirth of Thomism in the Catholic world toward the end of
the century, and the permutation of natural into human rights before
and after the First World War, made the disjunction and the amnesia
complete.
This debate continues, albeit in different registers and with
equivocal notions of ‘natural law’. For about half of the
twentieth century (in philosophy, law, and international relations),
natural law referred to a revived Scholasticism or Neo-Thomism. This
was joined after mid-century by the ‘secular’ natural law
of John Finnis (1940– ) and Robert P. George (1955– ),
later by the naturalism (or neo-Aristotelianism) of Amartya Sen
(1933– ) and Martha Nussbaum (1947– ), and most recently
by a new kind of Protestant natural law with roots in
sixteenth-century Reformed theology (Grabhill 2006, VanDrunen 2010,
Witte Jr. 2008). All these approaches involve essentialist claims of
sorts, even if empirically supported, and together with a Kantian
metaphysics of the person that is variously present in versions of
John Rawls (1921–2002) and Jürgen Habermas (1929– )
they provide ontological, procedural, or constructivist foundations
for discourse about human rights and dignity, and support for
international organizations and mechanisms that police them.
Accordingly, the supposed ‘right to punish’ is in full
force again, as are duties to assist, to rescue, and the like –
understandably so. However, despite attempts to enlist Pufendorf in
such causes by finding the prehistory of pivotal notions like rights,
dignity, and equality in his texts (Saastamoinen 2010, Fiorillo 2013a,
Müller 2011), his natural law is actually more akin to contrarian
approaches like the neo-Hobbesianism of Carl Schmitt
(1888–1985), the agonism of Chantal Mouffe (1943–) and
James Tully (1946–), the realism of Raymond Geuss (1946–
), and even the pragmatic naturalism of Philip Kitcher (1947– ).
These perspectives are not necessarily opposed to the practical aims
of the views they oppose and criticize, it may be useful to note (also
about Pufendorf), but merely insist upon fewer suppositions, less
presumption, and more modest goals.
Bibliography
Unattributed translations in this entry are by the author.
Abbreviations for Pufendorf’s Works
(bracketed dates
indicate that a title is distinguished from a larger work containing
it):
BW
Correspondence
(
Briefwechsel
): 1996, 1980
C. Gust.
On the Deeds of Charles Gustav, King of Sweden
(
De
rebus a Carolo Gustavo Sueciae rege gestis
): 1697a, 1697b,
1696
DAS
Select Academic Dissertations
(
Dissertationes
academicae selectiores
): 1698, 1679, 1678, 1677, 1675
Discussio
Discussion of Certain Writers of Brandenburg
(
Discussio quorundam scriptorum Brandeburgicorum
): [1995e],
1676, 1675a
DJN
On the Law of Nature and of Nations
(
De jure
naturae et gentium
): 2014, 2005, 1998a, 1998b, 1995c, 1995d,
1994a (sels.), 1987, 1934a, 1934b, 1744, 1729, 1706, 1684, 1672
DO
On the Duty of Man and Citizen According to Natural Law
(
De officio hominis et civis juxta legem naturalem
: [2014],
2003, 1997, 1995g, 1995h, 1992, 1991, 1984, 1927a, 1927b, 1735, 1691a,
1673
Einl.
An Introduction to the History of the Principal Kingdoms and
States of Europe
(
Einleitung zu der Historie der vornehmsten
Reiche und Staaten, so itziger Zeit in Europa sich befinden
):
2013, 1976a, [1839, 1714, 1691b], 1686b, 1682
EJU
Elements of Universal Jurisprudence
(
Elementa
jurisprudentiae universalis
): 2009, 1999, 1995a, 1995b, 1994a
(sels.), 1994b, 1931a, 1931b, 1660
ES
Eris Scandica und andere polemische Schriften über das
Naturrecht
: 2002b, 1744, 1686c
Feciale
The Divine Feudal Law
(
Jus feciale divinum
):
2004, 2002a, 1695a
Fr. Wilh.
On the Deeds of Frederick Wilhelm the Great, Elector of
Brandenburg
(
De rebus gestis Friderici Wilhelmi Magni,
Electoris Brandenburgici
): 1710a, 1695b
Gust. Ad.
Twenty-six Books on Swedish Affairs … Gustav Adolph
(
Commentariorum de rebus Suecicis … Gustavi Adophi … libri XXVI
): 1688, 1686a
GW
Samuel Pufendorf: Gesammelte Werke
, general editor,
Wilhelm Schmidt–Biggemann (Berlin: Akademic Verlag / DeGruyter,
1996 – )
Habitu
Of the Nature and Qualification of Religion in Reference to
Civil Society
(
De habitu religionis ad vitam civilem
):
2016, 2002c, 1972, 1687
KVS
Kleine Vorträge und Schriften. Texte zur Geschichte,
Pädagogik, Philosophie, Kirche und Völkerrecht
:
1995e
Monz
The Present State of Germany
([
Severini de
Monzambano Veronensis
]
De statu imperii Germanici ad Laelium
fratrem, dominum Trezolani
: 2007, 1995f, 1995i, 1994b, 1976b,
1910, 1877, 1870, 1710b, 1667
Occas.
On the Alliances Between Sweden and France
(
De
occasionibus foederum inter Sueciam et Galliam
: [1995e], 1709,
1708, 1707, 1680
Statu
On the Natural State of Men
(
De statu hominum
naturali
): 1990, 1675b
Primary Sources: Works by Pufendorf
The following is not a complete list of Pufendorf’s publications
and their various editions and translations. Original editions appear
only if mentioned in the text or bibliography, and if there have been
no later versions. The latter are included based on their
accessibility to contemporary readers and the existence of
translations into European languages other than Latin.
2016
De habitu religionis ad vitam civilem
, W.
Schmidt-Biggemann (ed.), (Series:
Samuel Pufendorf. Gesammelte
Werke
, W. Schmidt-Biggemann [ed.], Volume 6). Berlin,
Gruyter.
2014
De jure naturae et gentium
, F. Böhling (ed.),
(Series:
Samuel Pufendorf. Gesammelte Werke
, W.
Schmidt-Biggemann [ed.], Volume 4.3: Materialen und Kommentar).
Berlin, Gruyter.
2014
The Pufendorf Lectures: Annotations from the Teaching of
Samuel Pufendorf, 1672–1674
, B. Lindberg (ed.). Stockholm, Kungl.
Vitterhets historie och antikvitets akademien.
2013
An Introduction to the History of the Principal Kingdoms and
States of Europe
, J. Crull (trans.), M. J. Seidler (ed.),
(Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment Classics
, K.
Haakonssen [ed.]), Indianapolis, Liberty Fund; new edition of London,
Gilliflower, 1695.
2009
Two Books of the Elements of Universal Jurisprudence
,
W. A. Oldfather (trans.), T. Behme (ed.), (Series:
Natural Law and
Enlightenment Classics
, K. Haakonssen [ed.]), Indianapolis,
Liberty Fund; revised edition of Pufendorf 1931b.
2007
The Present State of Germany
, E. Bohun (trans.), M. J.
Seidler (ed.), (Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment
Classics
, K. Haakonssen [ed.]), Indianapolis, Liberty Fund; new
edition of London, Chiswell, 1696.
2005
Of the Law of Nature and Nations: Eight Books
, B.
Kennett (trans.), … Fourth Edition, … To Which Is Now
Prefixed Mr. Barbeyrac’s Prefatory Discourse, … Done into
English by Mr. [George] Carew, Buffalo, NY, Hein; see Pufendorf
1729.
2004
Jus feciale divinum
, D. Döring (ed.), (Series:
Samuel Pufendorf: Gesammelte Werke
, W. Schmidt-Biggemann
[ed.], Volume 4), Berlin, Akademie Verlag.
2003
The Whole Duty of Man, According to the Law of Nature
,
B. Tooke (trans.), I. Hunter and D. Saunders (eds.), (Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment Classics
, K. Haakonssen [ed.]),
Indianapolis, Liberty Fund; see Pufendorf 1735.
2002a
The Divine Feudal Law: or, Covenants with Mankind,
Represented
, T. Dorrington (trans.), S. Zurbuchen (ed.), (Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment Classics
, K. Haakonssen [ed.]),
Indianapolis, Liberty Fund; new edition of London, Wyat, 1703.
2002b
Eris Scandica und andere polemische Schriften über das
Naturrecht
, F. Palladini (ed.), (Series:
Samuel Pufendorf:
Gesammelte Werke
, W. Schmidt-Biggemann[ed.], Volume 5), Berlin,
Akademie.
2002c
Of the Nature and Qualification of Religion in Reference to
Civil Society
, J. Crull (trans.), S. Zurbuchen (ed.), (Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment Classics
, K. Haakonssen [ed.]),
Indianapolis, Liberty Fund; new edition of London, Roper &
Bosville, 1698; translation of Pufendorf 1687.
1999
Elementa jurisprudentiae universalis
, T. Behme (ed.),
(Series:
Samuel Pufendorf: Gesammelte Werke
., W.
Schmidt-Biggemann [ed.], Volume 3), Berlin, Akademie.
1998a
De jure naturae et gentium
, 2 vols., F. Böhling
(ed.), (Series:
Samuel Pufendorf: Gesammelte Werke
, W.
Schmidt-Biggemann [ed.], Volumes 4.1–2: Text). Berlin,
Akademie.
1998b
Herrn Samuels Freyherrn von Pufendorf Acht Bücher vom
Natur- und Völcker-Rechte, mit Weitberühmten Jcti Johann
Nicolai Hertii, Johann Barbeyrac und Anderer Hoch-Gelehrten
Männer Ausserlesenen Anmerckungen Erläutert und in die
Teutsche Sprache Übersetzt
, 2 vols., Hildesheim, Olms;
reprint of Frankfurt am Main, Knoch, 1711.
1997
De Officio
, G. Hartung (ed.), (Series:
Samuel
Pufendorf: Gesammelte Werke
, W. Schmidt-Biggemann [ed.], Volume
2), Berlin, Akademie; see Pufendorf 1691a.
1996
Briefwechsel
, D. Döring (ed.), (Series:
Samuel
Pufendorf: Gesammelte Werke
, W. Schmidt-Biggemann [ed.], Volume
1). Berlin, Akademie.
1995a
Elementorum jurisprudentiae universalis libri duo
, 2
vols., Volume 1:
Text
, Buffalo, NY, Hein; reprint of Oxford,
Clarendon Press, 1931a.
1995b
Elementorum jurisprudentiae universalis libri duo
, 2
vols., Volume 2:
Translation
, W. A. Oldfather (trans.), NY,
Hein; reprint of Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1931b.
1995c
De jure naturae et gentium libri octo
, 2 vols., Volume
1:
Text
, New York, Hein; reprint of Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1934a.
1995d
De jure naturae et gentium libri octo,
2 vols., Volume
2:
Translation
, C. H. Oldfather and W. A. Oldfather (trans.),
Buffalo, NY, Hein; reprint of Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1934b.
1995e
Kleine Vorträge und Schriften. Texte zur Geschichte,
Pädagogik, Philosophie, Kirche und Völkerrecht
, D.
Döring (ed.), Frankfurt am Main, Klostermann.
1995f
Monzambano, eines Veronesers ungescheuter offenherizger
Discurs, oder Gründlicher Bericht von der wahren Beschafenheit
und Zustand des Teutschen Reichs. Geschrieben an seinen Bruder Laelium
von Monzambano. Herrn zu Trezolan
. … ins teutsche
überssetzt durch ein ungenantes Glied der hochlöblichen
Fruchtbringenden Gesellschaft; in
Staatslehre der frühen
Neuzeit
, N. Hammerstein (ed.) (Series:
Bibliothek der
Geschichte und Politik
). Frankfurt am Main, Deutscher Klassiker
Verlag), pp. 568–931 (parallel text).
1995g
De officio hominis et civis juxta legem naturalem libri
duo
, 2 vols., Volume 1:
Text
, Buffalo, NJ, Hein; reprint
of New York, Oxford U. Pr., 1927a.
1995h
De officio hominis et civis juxta legem naturalem libri
duo
, 2 vols., Volume 2:
Translation
, F. G. Moore
(trans.), Buffalo, NJ, Hein; reprint of New York, Oxford U. Pr.,
1927b.
1995i
Severini de Monzambano Veronensis, De statu Imperii
Germanici, ad Laelium fratrem, Dominum Trezolani, liber unus
, in
Staatslehre der frühen Neuzeit
, N. Hammerstein (ed.)
(Series:
Bibliothek der Geschichte und Politik
). Frankfurt am
Main, Deutscher Klassiker Verlag, pp. 568–931 (parallel
text).
1994a
The Political Writings of Samuel Pufendorf
., M. J.
Seidler (trans.), C. L. Carr (ed.), New York, Oxford U. Pr.
1994b
Die Verfassung des Deutschen Reiches
(parallel text),
H. Denzer (ed. and trans.), (Series:
Bibliothek des Deutschen
Staatswesens
, H. Maier and M. Stolleis [eds.], Volume 4),
Frankfurt/M, Insel; see Pufendorf 1976b.
1992
Les devoirs de l’homme et du citoyen tels qu’ils
lui sont préscrits par la loi naturelle
, J. Barbeyrac
(trans.), Hildesheim, Olms; reprint of Amsterdam, Coup & Kuyper,
1734–35.
1991
On the Duty of Man and Citizen According to Natural
Law
, M. Silverthorne (trans.), J. Tully (ed.), New York,
Cambridge U. Pr.
1990
Samuel Pufendorf’s ‘On the Natural State of
Men’. The 1678 Latin Edition and English Translation
, M.
Seidler (ed. and trans.), Lewiston, ME, Mellen.
1987
Le droit de la nature et des gens
, J. Barbeyrac
(trans.), 4th ed., 2 vols., Caen, Centre de Philosophie Politique et
Juridique de l’Université de Caen; reprint of Basel,
Thourneisen, 1732.
1984
Les devoirs de l’homme et du citoyen
, J.
Barbeyrac (trans.), 6th ed., 2 vols., Caen: Centre de Philosophie
Politique et Juridique de l’Université de Caen; reprint
of London, Nourse, 1741.
1980
Briefe Samuel Pufendorfs an Christian Thomasius.
Pufendorf-Briefe an Falaiseau, Friese, und Weigel
, E. Gigas and
K. Varrentrapp (eds.), (Series:
Scriptor Reprints,
Sammlung 18. Jahrhundert
, J. Garber [ed.]), Meisenheim am
Glan, Hain; reprint of Leipzig, Oldenbourg, 1897, and
Historische
Zeitschrift
N.F. 34 (1893).
1976a
The Compleat History of Sweden
, C. Brockwell (trans.),
Norwood, PA, Norwood Editions; translation of Pufendorf 1686b.
1976b
Die Verfassung des Deutschen Reiches von Samuel von
Pufendorf
, H. Denzer (trans.), Stuttgart, Reclam; translation of
Pufendorf 1667; see Pufendorf 1994b.
1972
De habitu religionis christianae ad vitam civilem
,
Stuttgart- Bad Canstatt, Frommann; reprint of Bremen, Schwerdtfeger,
1687.
1934a
De jure naturae et gentium libri octo
, 2 vols., Volume
1:
Text
, (Series:
The Classics of International Law
,
ed. J. B. Scott [ed.], No. 17), Oxford, Clarendon Press; photographic
reproduction of Amsterdam, Hoogenhuysen, 1688.
1934b
De jure naturae et gentium libri octo
, 2 vols., Volume
2:
Translation
, C. H. Oldfather and W. A. Oldfather (trans.),
(Series:
The Classics of International Law
, J. B. Scott
[ed.], No. 17), Oxford, Clarendon Press.
1931a
Elementorum jurisprudentiae universalis libri duo
, 2
vols., Volume 1:
Text
, with an Introduction by Hans Wehberg,
(Series:
The Classics of International Law
, J. B. Scott
[ed.], No. 15), Oxford, Clarendon Press; photographic reproduction of
Cantabrigiae, Hayes, 1672.
1931b
Elementorum jurisprudentiae universalis libri duo
, 2
vols., vol. 2:
Translation
, W. A. Oldfather (trans.),
(Series:
The Classics of International Law
, J. B. Scott
[ed.], No. 15), Oxford, Clarendon Press; see Pufendorf 2009.
1927a
De officio hominis et civis juxta legem naturalem libri
duo
, 2 vols., Volume 1:
Text
, (Series:
The Classics
of International Law
, J. B. Scott [ed.], No. 10), New York,
Oxford U. Pr.; reprint of Cantabrigiae, Hayes, 1682.
1927b
De officio hominis et civis juxta legem naturalem libri
duo
, 2 vols., Volume 2:
Translation
, F. G. Moore
(trans.), (Series:
The Classics of International Law
, ed. J.
B. Scott [ed.], No. 10), New York, Oxford U. Pr.
1910
Severinus de Monzambano (Samuel von Pufendorf) De statu
Imperii Germanici
, F. Salomon (ed.), Weimar, Hermann Böhlaus
Nachfolger.
1877
Die Verfassung des deutschen Reiches von Samuel von
Pufendorf
, H. Dove (trans.), Leipzig, Philipp Reclam.
1870
Über die Verfassung des deutschen Reiches
, H.
Breßlau (trans.), Berlin, Heimann.
1839
Samuel von Pufendorff: Über das Pabstthum
, C. H.
Weise (ed.), Quedlinburg & Leipzig, Basse; revised edition of
Pufendorf 1714.
1784
De rebus gestis Friderici Tertii, Electoris Brandenburgici,
post primi Borussiae Regis commentariorum libri tres, complectentes
annos 1688–1690. Fragmentum posthumum ex autographo auctoris
editum
, E. F. de Hertzberg (ed.), Berlin, Decker.
1744
De jure naturæ et gentium libri octo
: cum
integris commentariis virorum clarissimorum Jo. N. Hertii atque J.
Barbeyraci. Accedit
Eris Scandica
, G. Mascovius (ed.),
Frankfurt am Main & Leipzig, Knoch.
1735
The Whole Duty of Man according to the Law of Nature
,
A. Tooke (trans.), 5th ed., London, Gosling; newly edited as Pufendorf
2003.
1729
Of the Law of Nature and Nations
, B. Kennett (trans.),
4th ed.,
to which are added all the large notes of Mr. Barbeyrac,
…
[and]
Mr. Barbeyrac’s prefatory discourse,
containing an historical and critical account of the science of
morality … done into English by Mr. Carew
, London,
Walthoe; translation of Pufendorf 1706; see Pufendorf 2005.
1719
[Esaias Pufendorf?],
Memoirs of Sweden, Containing a
Particular Account of the Great Change which Happened in the
Government of that Kingdom, in the Reign of King Charles XI…. /
Written by a Foreign Minister Residing in Sweden at That Time
,
translated from the French, London, Innys.
1714
Des Freyherrn von Pufendorff politische Betrachtung der
geistlichen Monarchie des Stuhls zu Rom, mit Anmerckungen. Zum
Gebrauch der Thomasischen Auditorii
, Halle, Renger; see Pufendorf
1839.
1710a
Friederich Wilhelms des Grossen Chur-Fürstens zu
Brandenburg Leben und Thaten
, E. Uhse (trans.), Berlin &
Franckfurt, Schrey und Meyer; translation of Pufendorf 1695b.
1710b
Samuels Freyhrn. von Puffendorff kurtzer doch
gründlicher Bericht von dem Zustande des H. R. Reichs Teutscher
Nation: vormahls in Lateinischer Sprache unter dem Titel Severin von
Monzambano herausgegeben, Anietzo aber ins Teutsche übersezet
… Ingleichen mit … Anmerckungen … nicht weniger
mit gantz neuen Remarquen und nützlichen Registern vesehen. Deme
noch beygefüget
(1.)
Die Historie von dem wunderlichen
Lärmen und Tumult welcher in der gelehrten Welt dieses Buches
wegen entstanden.
(2.)
Des Hrn. Autoris Untersuchung von der
Beschaffenheit eines irregulieren Staats
[=
De republica
irregulari
]. (3.)
Vita, Fama, et Fata Literaria
Pufendorfiana, oder denckwürdige Lebens-Memoire des
weltberuffenen Herrn Autoris
, Petronius Harteviggus Adlemansthal
[i.e., Peter Dahlmann] (ed. and trans.), Leipzig, Weidmann.
1709
Dissertation de Mr. de Puffendorf sur les alliances entre la
France et la Suede …
, traduit du Latin, La Haye, Johnson;
see Pufendorf 1680.
1708
Dissertatio de foederibus inter Sueciam et Galliam in qua
passim ostenditur, quam male illa a Gallis observata sint
…
, The Hague, Johnson; see Pufendorf 1680.
1707
A Discourse by M. Samuel Puffendorf upon the Alliances
Between Sweden and France … Written in the Year 1680
…
, Mr. Ozell (trans.), London, Buckley et al.; see
Pufendorf 1680.
1706
Le droit de la nature et des gens… avec des notes du
traducteur … et une preface …
, J. Barbeyrac
(trans.), Amsterdam, Kuyper, 1706; see Pufendorf 1987.
1697a
Herrn Samuel Freyherrns von Pufendorf Sieben Bücher von
den Thaten Carl Gustavs Königs in Schweden
, S. R. (trans.),
Nürnberg, Riegel; translation of Pufendorf 1696.
1697b
Histoire du regne de Charles Gustave, roi de Suede …
Traduite en François sur le Latin de S. de Pufendorf
, G.
Thomasius (ed.), Nuremberg, Riegel; translation of Pufendorf
1696.
1696
De rebus a Carolo Gustavo Sueciae rege gestis commentariorum
libri septem. Elegantissimis tabulis aeneis exornati, cum triplice
indice
, G. Thomasius (ed.), Nuremberg, Riegel; see Pufendorf
1697a and 1697b.
1695a
Jus feciale divinum sive de consensu et dissensu
Protestantium exercitatio posthuma
, Lübeck, A.S.R.
1695b
De rebus gestis Friderici Wilhelmi Magni, Electoris
Brandenburgici commentariorum libri novendecim
, Berlin, J. Schrey
& H. J. Meyer; see Pufendorf 1710a.
1691a
Herrn Samuel von Pufendorff Einleitung zur Sitten- und
Statslehre …
, I. Weber (trans.), Leipzig, Gleditsch;
reprinted in Pufendorf 1997.
1691b
The History of Popedom: Containing the Rise, Progress and
Decay Thereof
, J. Chamberylayne (trans.), London, Hindmarsh; see
Pufendorf 1714, 1839.
1688
Herrn Samuel von Pufendorf Sechs und Zwantzig Bücher
der Schwedisch- und Deutschen Kriegs-Geschichte von König Gustav
Adolfs Feldzüge in Deutschland an biß zur Abdanckung der
Königin Christina
, J. J. Möller (trans.), Franckfurt am
Mayn & Leipzig, Gleditsch; translation of Pufendorf 1686a.
1687
De habitu religionis Christianae ad vitam civilem, Liber
Singularis. Accedunt Animadversiones ad aliqua loca è Politica
Adriani Houtuyn JCti Batavi
, Bremen, Schwerdfeger; reprinted
Stuttgart-Bad Cannstatt, Frommann-Holzboog, 1972.
1686a
Commentariorum de rebus Suecicis libri XXVI ab expeditione
Gustavi Adolfi Regis in Germaniam ad abdicationem usque
Christinae
, Ultrajecti, Ribbius.
1686b
Continuirte Einleitung zu der Historie der vornehmsten
Reiche und Staaten von Europa, worinnen des Königreichs Schweden
Geschichte und dessen mit auswertigen Cronen geführte Kriege
insonderheit beschrieben werden
, Frankfurt, Knoch; see Pufendorf
1976a.
1686c
Eris Scandica: qua adversus libros
De jure naturali et
gentium
objecta diluuntur
, Frankfurt am Main, Knoch; see
Pufendorf 2002b.
1684
De jure naturæ et gentium libri octo
, 2nd ed.,
Frankfurt am Main, Knoch.
1682
Einleitung zu der Historie der vornehmsten Reiche und
Staaten, so itziger Zeit in Europa sich befinden
, Frankfurt,
Knoch; see Pufendorf 2013.
1680
De occasionibus foederum inter Sueciam et Galliam et quam
parum illa ex parte Galliae observata sint
; in Pufendorf 1995e:
pp. 360–85; see Pufendorf 1707, 1708, and 1709.
1676
Beleuchtigung und Wiederlegung einiger Brandenburgischen
Schrifften … Anno 1675 in lateinischer Sprache zu Papier und
Druck gegeben, und nunmehr mittels praemittirter Vorrede ins teutsche
versetzt
; translation of 1675a.
1675a
Discussio quorundam scriptorum Brandeburgicorum
, in
Pufendorf 1995e: pp. 281–327.
1675b
Dissertationes academicae selectiores
, Lund, V.
Haberegger.
1673
De officio hominis et civis juxta legem naturalem libri
duo
, Lund, Junghans.
1672
De jure naturæ et gentium libri octo
, Lund,
Junghans.
1667
Severini de Monzambano Veronensis De statu imperii Germanici
ad Laelium fratrem, dominum Trezolani, liber unus
, Geneva [The
Hague], Petrus Columesius [Adrian Vlacq].
1660
Elementorum jurisprudentiæ universalis libri II
,
The Hague, A. Vlacq.
Other Primary Sources
Achenwall, G., 1762, “Vorbereitung. Von der Statistik
überhaupt,” in
Staatsverfassung der heutigen
vornehmsten Europäischen Reiche im Grundriße
, 4.
verbesserte Ausgabe, Göttingen, Vandenhoeck, pp. 1–38.
Barbeyrac, Jean, 2005, “An Historical and Critical Account
of the Science of Morality, And the Progress it has made in the World,
from the earliest Times …,” Mr. [George] Carew (trans.),
or Prefatory Discourse to Samuel Pufendorf,
Of the Law of Nature
and Nations
, B. Kennett (trans.), 4th ed., Buffalo, NY, Hein;
reprint of London, S. Aris, 1729; in Pufendorf 2005.
Burlamaqui, Jean-Jacques, 2006,
The Principles of Natural and
Politic Law
, T. Nugent (trans.), P. Korkman (ed.), (Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment Classics
, K. Haakonssen [ed.]),
Indianapolis, Liberty Fund; new edition of London, Nourse, 1763.
Carmichael, Gershom, 2002,
Natural Rights on the Threshold of
the Scottish Enlightenment. The Writings of Gershom Carmichael
,
M. Silverthorne (trans.), J. Moore and M. Silverthorne (eds.),
(Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment Classics
, K.
Haakonssen [ed.]), Indianapolis, Liberty Fund. New edition of
Supplements and Observations upon The Two Books of Samuel
Pufendorf’s
On the Duty of Man and Citizen according to the
Law of Nature
composed for the use of students in the
Universities
, Edinburgh, Mosman, 1724;
A Synopsis of Natural
Theology
, Edinburgh, Paton, 1729;
A Short Introduction to
Logic
, Edinburgh, Mosman, 1722; and
Philosophical
Theses
, Glasgow, Sanders, 1699, 1707.
Cumberland, Richard, 2005,
A Treatise of the Laws of
Nature
, John Maxwell (trans.), J. Parkin (ed.), (Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment Classics
, K. Haakonssen [ed.]),
Indianapolis, Liberty Fund; new edition of London, Phillips,
1727.
Glafey, Adam Friedrich, 1965,
Vollständige Geschichte des
Rechts der Vernunft … nebst einer Bibliotheca Juris Naturae et
Gentium
, Aalen, Scientia Verlag; reprint of Leipzig, Riegel,
1739.
Heineccius, Johann Gottlieb, 2008,
Methodical System of
Universal Law: Or, the Laws of Nature and Nations, with Supplements
and a Discourse by George A. Turnbull
, T. Ahnert and P.
Schröder (trans.), (Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment
Classics
, K. Haakonssen [ed.]), Indianapolis, Liberty Fund; new
edition of London, Noon, 1741.
Hutcheson, Francis, 1993, “Inaugural lecture on the social
nature of man,” in
Francis Hutcheson: Two Texts on Human
Nature
, T. Mautner (ed. and trans.), New York, Cambridge U. Pr.,
pp. 107–47.
–––, 2006,
Logic, Metaphysics, and the
Natural Sociability of Mankind
, M. Silverthorne (trans.), J.
Moore and M. Silverthorne (eds.), (Series:
Natural Law and
Enlightenment Classics
, K. Haakonssen [ed.]), Indianapolis,
Liberty Fund. New edition of
Logicae Compendium
, Glasgow,
Foulis, 1756; and
Synopsis Metaphysicae
, Glasgow, Foulis,
1744.
–––, 2007,
Philosophia Moralis Institutio
Compediaria, with A Short Introduction to Moral Philosophy
, L.
Turco (ed.), (Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment Classics
,
K. Haakonssen [ed.]), Indianapolis, Liberty Fund; new edition
(parallel text) of Glasgow, Foulis, 1747.
Krawczuk, W., 2014,
Samuel Pufendorf and Some Stories of the
Northern War 1655–1660
, Krakow, Jagiellonian U. Pr.;
distributed New York, Columbia U. Pr.; study of Pufendorf 1696, with
excerpts, translations, and commentary.
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 1972, “Opinion on the Principles
of Pufendorf,” in
The Political Writings of Leibniz
, P.
Riley (trans.), Cambridge, Cambridge U. Pr., pp. 64–75.
Lindberg, B. (ed. and trans.), 2014,
The Pufendorf Lectures:
Annotations from the Teaching of Samuel Pufendorf,
1672–1674
(Series:
Kungl. Vitterhets historie och
antikvitets akademien handlingar Filologisk-filosofiska serien
,
No. 221), Stockholm, Kungl. Vitterhets historie och antikvitets
akademien; Lund U. student notes on Pufendorf’s classroom
lectures over DJN and DO, with an introduction and an English
translation.
Logan, J., 2013,
Of the Duties of Man as they may be deduced
from Nature
, P. Valenti (ed.), Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Thomasius, Christian, 2007,
Essays on Church, State, and
Politics
, I. Hunter, T. Ahnert, and F. Grunert (eds. and trans.),
(Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment Classics
, K.
Haakonssen [ed.]), Indianapolis, Liberty Fund.
–––, 2011,
Institutes of Divine
Jurisprudence
, with Selections from
Foundations of the Law of
Nature and Nations
, T. Ahnert (ed. and trans.), (Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment Classics
, K. Haakonssen [ed.]),
Indianapolis, Liberty Fund. Translation of
Institutiones
jurisprudentiae divinae
, Leipzig, Weidmann, 1688; and selections
from
Fundamenta juris naturae et gentium
, Halle, Salfeld,
1705.
Tyrrell, J., 1681,
Patriarcha non Monarcha. The Patriarch
Unmonarch’d
, London, Printed for Richard Janeway.
Vattel, Emer de, 2008,
The Law of Nations
, B. Kapossy and
R. Whatmore (eds.), (Series:
Natural Law and Enlightenment
Classics
, K. Haakonssen [ed.]), Indianapolis, Liberty Fund; new
edition of London, Robinson, 1797.
Weigel, E., 2003,
Arithmetische Beschreibung der
Moral-Weißheit von Personen und Sachen
, T. Behme (ed.)
(Series:
Erhard Weigel, Werke
, Vol. 2:
Clavis
Pansophiae
3,2), Stuttgart, Frommann Holzboog.
Secondary Sources
Aarsleff, H., 2011, “Pufendorf and Condillac on Law and
Language,”
Journal of the Philosophy of History
5(3):
308–21.
Ahnert, T., 2013, “Samuel Pufendorf and Religious
Intolerance in the Early Enlightenment,” in Parkin and Stanton
(eds.), pp. 15–33.
–––, 2009, “Epicureanism and the
Transformation of Natural Law in the Early German
Enlightenment,” in
Epicurus in the Enlightenment
, N.
Leddy and A. S. Lifschutz (eds.), Oxford, Voltaire Foundation, pp.
53–68.
–––, 2006,
Religion and the Origins of the
German Enlightenment. Faith and the Reform of Learning in the Thought
of Christian Thomasius
, Rochester, NY, University of Rochester
Press.
Aichele, A., 2014, “Protestantische Willensfreiheit? Samuel
Pufendorfs Molinismus,”
Studia Leibnitiana
46(1):
17–31.
Almquist, J. E., 1941, “Samuel Pufendorf och Nicolaus
Beckman. En akademisk fejd pa 1670– talet,”
Lychnos
4: 49–101.
Andrade, L. F. N. de, and S. Sahd, 2011, “Pufendorf critico
de Spinoza: a limitacao do alcance do direito natural,”
Revista Conatus
5(10): 65–72.
–––, 2010, “Samuel Pufendorf e o discurso
dos direitos,”
Sintese: Revista de Filosofia
37(118):
243–66.
–––, 2007, “Teorias da lei natural:
Pufendorf e Rousseau,”
Trans/Form/Ação
(São Paulo)
30(2): 219–34.
Angelis, S. de, 2004, “Pufendorf und der
Cartesianismus,”
Internationales Archiv für
Sozialgeschichte der deutschen Literatur
29(1):
129–72.
Armogathe, J.-R., 2008, “Deus Legislator,” in L.
Daston and M. Stolleis (eds.), pp. 265–77.
Arner, N. D., 2012,
Theological Voluntarism and the Natural
Law: The Integrated Moral Theories of John Duns Scotus, John Calvin,
and Samuel Pufendorf
, Ph.D. dissertation, Yale University.
Auer, M., 2015, “Die Substanz der Freiheit: Pufendorfs
Begriff der moralischen Person,” in
Person und Rechtsperson
: zur Ideengeschichte der Personalität
, R. Gröschner
(ed.), Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck, pp. 81–99.
–––, 2008, “Subjektive Rechte bei
Pufendorf und Kant. Eine Analyse im Lichte der Rechtskritik
Hohfelds,”
Archiv für die civilistische Praxis
208(5): 584–634.
Augat, A., 1985,
Die Aufnahme der Lehren Samuel von Pufendorfs
(1632–1694) in das Recht der Vereinigten Staaten von
Amerika
, Ph.D. dissertation,
Christian-Albrechts-Universität, Kiel.
Avril, P., 2014, “Pufendorf,” in
Les fondateur du
droit international
, J. Barthélemy, A. Pillet and D.
Alland (eds.), Paris, Édition Panthéon-Assas.
Bach, O., 2015, “
Obligatio
. Instanzen und
Fundamente von Verbindlichkeit: Melanchthon – Pufendorf –
Hobbes – Rousseau,” in
Das Band der Gesellschaft.
Verbindlichkeitsdiskurse im 18. Jahrhundert
, S. Bunke, K.
Mihaylova and D. Ringkamp (eds.), Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck, pp.
19–36.
–––, 2015, “Neue Welt und
Rechtsphilosophie : frühneuzeitliche lnterkulturalität und
lntermedialität am Beispiel der
Commentarios Reales de los
Incas
des Garcilaso de la Vega und ihrer Rezeption bei Samuel von
Pufendorf,” in
Ibero-amerikanisches Jahrbuch für
Germanistik 2014
, I. Hernández and M. Vedda (eds.),
Berlin, Weidler, ch. 8, pp. 7–37.
–––, 2013, “Natur als juridisches Argument
an der Schwelle zur Aufklärung. Zu den theonomen,
rationalistischen und voluntaristischen Systemstellen des Denkens vom
Naturzustand bei Samuel Pufendorf und Christian Thomasius,”
Aufklärung. Interdisziplinäres Jahrbuch zur Erforschung
des 18. Jahrhunderts und seiner Wirkungsgeschichte
25:
23–50.
Basso, L., 2013, “ ‘Politische Theodizee’.
Leibniz’ Kontroverse mit Pufendorf,” in
300 Jahre
“Essais de Théodicée” – Rezeption und
Transformation
, W. Li and W. Schmidt-Biggemann (eds.), Stuttgart,
Steiner, pp. 87–96.
Bazzoli, M., 1996, “La concezione Pufendorfiana della
politica internazionale,” in Fiorillo (ed.), pp.
29–72.
Behme, T., 2016, “Samuel Pufendorf als
Weigel-Schüler,” in K. Habermann and K. –D. Herbst
(eds.), pp. 85–111.
–––, 2009a, “Die
fictio contrarii
als methodisches Werkzeug in Pufendorfs Naturrechtslehre,” in
Begriffe, Metaphern und Imaginationen in Philosophie und
Wissenschaftsgeschichte
, L. Danneberg, C. Spoerhase, and D. Werle
(eds.), Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz, pp. 266–86.
–––, 2009b, “Ziele und Grenzen der
Staatsgewalt bei Samuel Pufendorf,” in Hüning (ed.), pp.
51–70.
–––, 2002, “Pufendorf’s Doctrine of
Sovereignty and its Natural Law Foundations,” in Hunter and
Saunders (eds.), pp. 43–58.
–––, 1996, “Gegensätzliche
Einflüsse in Pufendorfs Naturrecht,” in Palladini and
Hartung (eds.), pp. 74–82.
–––, 1995,
Samuel von Pufendorf: Naturrecht
und Staat. Eine Analyse und Interpretation seiner Theorie, ihrer
Grundlagen und Probleme
, Göttingen, Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht.
Bérenger, J., 1993, “Un diplomate Suédois ami
de la France: Esaias Pufendorf (1628–1687),”
XVIIe
Siècle
45: 223–46
Bergfeld, C., 1996, “Pufendorf und Heineccius,” in
Palladini and Hartung (eds.), pp. 225–35.
Berndtsson, T., 2015, “Bringing Into the Light, or
Increasing Darkness With Darkness: Jacob Wilde’s Rewriting of
Samuel Pufendorf’s Account of Swedish Ancient History,” in
Traces of Transnational Relations in the Eighteenth Century
,
T. Berndtsson, A. Mattsson, M. Persson, V. Sundin and M. –C.
Skuncke (eds.), Uppsala, Uppsala University Library, pp.
121–46.
Besselink, L., 1997, “The Impious Hypothesis
Revisited,” in
Grotius
, J. Dunn and I. Harris (eds.),
Lyme, NH, Edward Elgar, pp. 514–74.
Blickle, P., 2003,
Von der Leibeigenschaft zu den
Menschenrechten. Eine Geschichte der Freiheit in Deutschland
,
München, C. H. Beck, Ch. 18, pp. 278–97.
Böhling, F., 2014, “Samuel Pufendorf in Heidelberg,
Lund, Stockholm und Berlin. Beiträge zu seiner Biographie mit
Werkübersichten,” in
Samuel Pufendorf
(2014), pp.
3–57.
Borries, U. H. von, 2000, “Samuel Pufendorf und die
Niederlande. Zur Divergenz des deutschen, niederländischen und
angelsächsischen Pufendorf-Bildes,”
Morgen-Glantz.
Zeitschrift der Christian Knorr von Rosenroth-Gesellschaft
10:
295–332.
Boucher, D., 2009,
The Limits of Ethics in International
Relations. Natural Law, Natural Rights, and Human Rights in
Transition
, New York, Oxford U. Pr.
–––, 2001, “Resurrecting Pufendorf and
Capturing the Westphalian Moment,”
Review of International
Studies
27: 557–77.
–––, 1998, “Pufendorf and the Person of
the State,” in
Political Theories of International
Relations
, D. Boucher (ed.), New York, Oxford U. Pr., Ch. 10, pp.
223–54.
Boyd, N., 2019, “The Reception of Hobbes in Germany and the
Holy Roman Empire. Pufendorf, Christian Thomasius, and Hegel,”
Hobbes Studies
32: 22–45.
Brett, A. S., 2011,
Changes of State. Nature and the Limits of
the City in Early Modern Natural Law
, Princeton NJ, Princeton U.
Pr.
–––, 1997,
Liberty, Right and Nature.
Individual Rights in Later Scholastic Thought
, Cambridge,
Cambridge U. Pr.
Brückner, J., 1977,
Staatswissenschaften, Kameralismus
und Naturrecht. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der politischen
Wissenschaft im Deutschland des späten 17. und frühen 18.
Jahrhunderts
, München, Beck.
Buchholz, S., 1988,
Recht, Religion und Ehe.
Orientierungswandel und gelehrte Kontroversen im Übergang vom 17.
zum 18. Jahrhundert
, Frankfurt am Main, Klostermann.
Buckle, S., 1991,
Natural Law and the Theory of Property:
Grotius to Hume
, Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Burns, A., 1999, “The Source of the
Encyclopédie
Article ‘Loi Naturelle
(Morale)’,” in Haakonssen (ed.), Ch. 22, pp.
493–502.
Carr, C. L., and M. J. Seidler, 1999, “Pufendorf, Sociality,
and the Modern State,”
History of Political Thought
17(3): 354–378.
Caradonna, J., 2006, “ ‘The Death of Duty’: The
Transformation of Political Identity from the Old Regime to the French
Revolution,”
Historical Reflections
32(2), pp.
273–307.
Cattaneo, M. A., 1996, “Samuel Pufendorf e Paul Johann
Anselm Feuerbach: contratto sociale, secolarizzazione penale e
prevenzione generale,” in Fiorillo (ed.), pp. 3–28.
Cavallar, G., 2008, “Vitoria, Grotius, Pufendorf, Wolff and
Vattel: Accomplices of European Colonialism and Exploitation or True
Cosmopolitans?”
Journal of the History of International
Law
10(2): 181–209.
–––, 2002,
The Rights of Strangers. Theories
of International Hospitality, the Global Community, and Political
Justice since Vitoria
, Burlington, VT, Ashgate, pp.
189–208.
Chiodi, G. M., 2009, “Die
socialitas
in der ersten
Hälfte des 18. Jahrhunderts in Deutschland. Ein philosophisches
Sittenbild von der Entstehung der bürgerlichen
Gesellschaft,” in V. Fiorillo and F. Grunert (eds.), pp.
13–38.
Covell, C., 2009,
The Law of Nations in Political Thought. A
Critical Survey from Vitoria to Hegel
, New York,
Palgrave/Macmillan, pp. 63–90.
Crowe, J., 2007, “Natural Law in Jurisprudence and
Politics,”
Oxford Journal of Legal Studies
27(4):
775–94.
Crowe, M. B. (ed.), 1977,
The Changing Profile of Natural
Law
, The Hague, Nijhoff.
Curley, E., 1995, “Samuel Pufendorf (1632–1694) as a
Critic of Spinoza,” in
L’hérésie
Spinoziste. La discussion sur le Tractatus Theologico-Politicus,
1670–1677, et la réception immédiate du
Spinozisme
, P. Cristofolini (ed.), Amsterdam, APA-Holland U. Pr.,
pp. 89–96.
Dann, O., and D. Klippel (eds.), 1995,
Naturrecht –
Aufklärung – Revolution
, Hamburg, Meiner.
Darwall, S., 2012, “Pufendorf on Morality, Sociability, and
Moral Powers,”
Journal of the History of Philosophy
50(2): 213–38.
–––, 2006a, “The Foundations of Morality:
Virtue, Law, and Obligation,” in
The Cambridge Companion to
Early Modern Philosophy
, D. Rutherford (ed.), New York, Cambridge
U. Pr., pp. 221–49.
–––, 2006b, “Norm and Normativity,”
in
The Cambridge History of Eighteenth-Century Philosophy
, 2
vols., K. Haakonssen (ed.), New York, Cambridge U. Pr., Volume 2, Ch.
33, pp. 987–1025.
–––, 2006c,
The Second-Person Standpoint.
Morality, Respect and Accountability
, Cambridge, MA, Harvard U.
Pr.
–––, 2004, “Autonomy in Modern Natural
Law,” in
New Essays on the History of Autonomy. A Collection
Honoring J. B. Schneewind
, N. Brender and L. Krasnoff (eds.), New
York, Cambridge U. Pr., pp. 110–129.
Daston, L., and M. Stolleis (eds.), 2008,
Natural Law and Laws
of Nature in Early Modern Europe: Jurisprudence, Theology, Moral and
Natural Philosophy
. Burlington, VT, Ashgate.
Dawson, H., 2020, “The Normativity of Nature in Pufendorf
and Locke,”
The Historical Journal
63(3):
528–58.
–––, 2013, “Natural Religion: Pufendorf
and Locke on the Edge of Freedom and Reason,” in
Freedom and
the Construction of Europe
, 2 vols., Q. Skinner and M. van
Gelderen (eds.), New York, Cambridge U. Pr., Volume 1:
Religious
and Constitutional Liberties
, pp. 115–33.
Denzer, H., 1983, “Leben, Werk und Wirkung Samuel
Pufendorfs. Zum Gedenken seines 350. Geburtstags,”
Zeitschrift für Politik
30(2): 160–76.
–––, 1972,
Moralphilosophie und Naturrecht
bei Samuel Pufendorf: Eine Geistes- und Wissenschaftsgeschichtliche
Untersuchung
, Aalen, Scientia.
Derathé, R., 1992,
Jean-Jacques Rousseau et la science
politique de son temps
, 2nd ed., Paris, Vrin.
Desmons, E., 2011/12, “La notion d’exécution
chez Pufendorf et Burlamaqui,”
Revue française
d’histoire des idées politiques
34:
245–52.
Devetak, R., 2015, “Historiographical Foundations of Modern
International Thought: Histories of the European States-System from
Florence to Göttingen,”
History of European Ideas
41(1): 62–77.
–––, 2007, “Between Kant and Pufendorf:
Humanitarian Intervention, Statist Anti-Cosmopolitanism and Critical
International Theory,”
Review of International Studies
33: 151–74.
Dingel, I., 1998, “Recht und Konfession bei Samuel von
Pufendorf,” in
Recht-Macht-Gerechtigkeit
, J. Mehlhausen
(ed.), Gütersloh, Chr. Kaiser Gütersloher Verlagshaus, pp.
516–40.
Döring, D. (ed.), 2012,
Samuel Pufendorf in der Welt des
17. Jahrhunderts
, Frankfurt am Main, Klostermann.
–––, 2010, “Leibniz’s critique of
Pufendorf. A dispute in the eve of the Enlightenment,” in
The Practice of Reason. Leibniz and his Controversies
, M.
Dascal (ed.), Philadelphia, John Benjamins, pp. 245–72.
–––, 2009, “Wirkungen des konfessionellen
Denkens auf das juristische Werk Samuel von Pufendorfs,” in
Konfessionalität und Jurisprudenz in der frühen
Neuzeit
, C. Strohm and H. de Wall (eds.), Berlin, Duncker &
Humblot, pp. 415–30.
–––, 2006, “Samuel Pufendorf und die
Heidelberger Universität in der Mitte des 17.
Jahrhunderts,” in
Späthumanismus und Reformierte
Konfession. Theologie, Jurisprudenz und Philosophie in Heidelberg an
der Wende zum 17. Jahrhundert
, C. Strohm, J. S. Freedman, and H.
J. Selderhuis (eds.), Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck, pp.
293–323.
–––, 2004, “Das gelehrte Leipzig der
Frühaufklärung am Rande und im Umfeld der
Universität,” in
Die Universität Leipzig und ihr
gelehrtes Umfeld 1680–1780
, H. Marti and D. Döring
(eds.), Basel, Schwabe, pp. 11–53.
–––, 1998, “Samuel von Pufendorf and
Toleration,” in
Beyond the Persecuting Society. Religious
Toleration before the Enlightenment
, J. C. Laursen and C. J.
Nederman (eds.), Philadelphia, U. of Philadelphia Pr., pp.
178–96.
–––, 1996a, “Biographisches zu Samuel
Pufendorf,” in
Samuel Pufendorf und seine Wirkungen bis auf
die heutige Zeit
, Geyer, Goerlich, and Schliebe (eds.),
Baden-Baden, Nomos, pp. 23–37.
–––, 1996b, “Samuel von Pufendorfs
Berufung nach Brandenburg-Preußen, ” in Palladini and
Hartung (eds.), Berlin, Akademie, pp. 11–28.
–––, 1995,
Frühaufklärung und
obrigkeitliche Zensur in Brandenburg. Friedrich Wilhelm Stosch und das
Verfahren gegen sein Buch ‘Concordia rationis et
fidei’
, Berlin, Duncker & Humblot.
–––, 1994,
Samuel Pufendorf als Student in
Leipzig
, Leipzig, Universitätsbibliothek.
–––, 1992,
Pufendorf-Studien. Beiträge
zur Biographie Samuel von Pufendorfs und zu seiner Entwicklung als
Historiker und Theologischer Schriftsteller
, Berlin, Duncker
& Humblot.
–––, 1988, “Samuel Pufendorf
(1632–1694) und die Leipziger Gelehrtengesellschaften in der
Mitte des 17. Jahrhunderts,”
Lias. Sources and Documents
Relating to the Early Modern History of Ideas
15:
13–48.
Douglass, R., 2015,
Rousseau and Hobbes. Nature, Free Will,
and the Passions
, Oxford, Oxford U. Pr.
–––, 2013, “Rousseau’s Critique of
Representative Democracy: Principled or Pragmatic?”
American
Journal of Political Science
57(3): 735–47.
–––, 2011, “Rousseau’s Debt to
Burlamaqui: The Ideal of Nature and the Nature of Things,”
Journal of the History of Ideas
72(2): 209–30.
Doyé, S., 2012, “Das Eherecht der deutschen
Frühaufklärung im Spiegel des neuzeitlichen Naturrechts.
Hugo Grotius, Samuel Pufendorf, Christian Thomasius, Christian
Wolff,” in
Geschlechterordnung und Staat.
Legitimationsfiguren der politischen Philosophie
(1600–1850)
, M. Heinz and S. Doyé (eds.), Berlin,
Akademie, pp. 57–117.
Drakopoulou, M., 2013, “Samuel Pufendorf, Feminism, and the
Question of ’Women and Law’,” in
Feminist
Encounters with Legal Philosophy
, M. Drakopoulou (ed.), New York,
Routledge-Cavendish, pp. 66–91.
Dreitzel, H., 2009, “Von Melanchthon zu Pufendorf. Versuch
über Typen und Entwicklung der philosophischen Ethik im
protestantischen Deutschland zwischen Reformation und
Aufklärung,” in
Spätrenaissance-Philosophie in
Deutschland 1570–1650. Entwürfe zwischen Humanismus und
Konfessionalisierung, okkulten Traditionen und Schulmetaphysik
,
M. Mulsow (ed.), Tübingen, Niemeyer, pp. 321–98.
–––, 2005, “Zehn Jahre
‘Patria’ in der Politischen Theorie in Deutschland:
Prasch, Pufendorf, Leibniz, Becher 1662 bis 1672,” in Friedeburg
(ed.), pp. 367–534.
–––, 2003, “The Reception of Hobbes in the
Political System of the Early German Enlightenment,”
History
of European Ideas
29(3): 255–89.
–––, 2001, “Samuel Pufendorf,” in
Die Philosophie des 17. Jahrhunderts
. Vol. 4:
Das
Heilige-Römische Reich Deutscher Nation. Nord- und
Ostmitteleuropa
, H. Holzhey, W. Schmidt-Biggemann, and V. Mudroch
(eds.), Basel, Schwabe & Co, pp. 757–812.
Dufour, A., 2005, “La pensée politique de Pufendorf
et la permanence de l’idée luthérienne de
l’Etat,” in Ferronato (ed.), pp. 7–39.
–––, 1996, “Pufendorfs
föderalistische Denken und die Staatsräsonlehre,” in
Palladini and Hartung (eds.), pp. 105–22.
–––, 1991a,
Droits de l’homme, droit
naturel et histoire
, Paris, Presses Universitaires de
France.
–––, 1991b, “Pufendorf,” in
The
Cambridge History of Political Thought, 1450–1700
, J. H.
Burns and M. Goldie (eds.), Cambridge, Cambridge U. Pr., pp.
561–88.
–––, 1991c, “Les ruses de la raison
d’état, ou histoire et droit naturel dans l’oeuvre
et la pensée des fondateurs du droit naturel moderne,” in
Festschrift für Hans Thieme zu seinem 80. Geburtstag
, K.
Kroeschell (ed.), Sigmaringen, Thorbecke, pp. 265–84.
–––, 1980, “L’influence de la
méthologie des sciences physiques et mathématiques sur
les fondateurs de l’ecole du droit naturel moderne (Grotius,
Hobbes, Pufendorf),”
Grotiana
1: 33–52.
–––, 1976, “Tradition et modernité
de la conception Pufendorfienne de l’état,”
Archives de Philosophie du Droit
21: 55–74.
–––, 1972,
Le mariage dans l’ecole
allemande du droit naturel moderne au XVIIIe siècle. Les
sources philosophiques de la Scolastique aux Lumières –
La doctrine
, Paris, Librairie Générale de Droit et
de Jurisprudence.
Edelstein, D., 2019,
On the Spirit of Rights
, Chicago,
University of Chicago Press.
–––, 2014, “Enlightenment Rights
Talk,”
The Journal of Modern History
86(3), pp.
530–65.
Ehrle, M., 1952,
Die Ehe im Naturrecht des 17. Jahrhunderts.
Ein Beitrag zu den geistesgeschichtlichen Grundlagen des modernen
Eherechts
, Göttingen, Universität Göttingen, pp.
112–155.
Entner, H., 1999, “Leibniz und Pufendorf. Bemerkungen zu
zwei Gedichten,” in
Labora Diligenter. Potsdamer
Arbeitstagung Zur Leibnizforschung vom 4. bis 6. Juli 1996
, M.
Fontius and H. Rudolph (eds.), Stuttgart, Steiner, pp.
186–96.
Eskildsen, K. R., 2004, “How Germany Left the Republic of
Letters,”
Journal of the History of Ideas
65(3):
421–32.
Fenske, H., 2013, “ ‘Die Freyheit ist der Menschen
Eigenthum’. Zur Frühgeschichte des deutschen
Liberalismus,” in
Von Freiheit, Solidarität und
Subsidiarität – Staat & Gesellschaft der Moderne in
Theorie und Praxis : Festschrift für Karsten Ruppert zum 65.
Geburtstag
, M. Raasch (ed.), Berlin, Duncker & Humblot, pp.
331–56.
Ferronato, M. (ed.), 2005,
Dal “De Jure Naturae et
Gentium” di Samuel Pufendorf alla Codificazione Prussiana del
1794
, Milan, Antonio.
Fetscher, I., 1960, “Der gesellschaftliche
‘Naturzustand’ und das Menschenbild bei Hobbes, Pufendorf,
Cumberland und Rousseau,”
Schmollers Jahrbuch für
Gesetzgebung, Verwaltung und Volkswirtschaft
80(2):
1–45.
Fiedler, B.-C., 2003, “Esaias v. Pufendorf
(1628–1689). Diplomat in Europa und Kanzler in den Schwedischen
Herzogtümern Bremen und Verden. Eine biographische Skizze,”
in
Gemeinsame Bekannte. Schweden und Deutschland in der
frühen Neuzeit
, I. Asmus, H. Droste, and J. E. Olesen
(eds.), Münster: LIT, pp. 171–193.
Fiorillo, V., 2017, “States as ethico-political subjects of
international law: the relationship between theory and practice in the
international politics of Samuel Pufendorf,” in
System,
Order, and International Law
, S. Kadelbach, T. Kleinlein and D.
Roth-Isigkei (eds.), Oxford, Oxford University Press, pp.
199–215.
–––, 2016, “An ethico-political model of
cooperation among states. The relationship between theory and practice
in the international politics of Samuel Pufendorf,”
Juristische Zeitgeschichte. Jahrbuch der juristischen
Zeitgeschichte
17: 251–86.
–––, 2013a, “Der Andere –
ut
aeque homo
: Gleichheit und Menschenwürde in der politischen
Anthropologie Samuel Pufendorfs,”
Archiv für Rechts-
und Sozialphilosophie
99(1): 11–28.
–––, 2013b, “La patria, come stato dei
padri. La obligatio erga patriam nella teoria politica di Samuel
Pufendorf,” in
Patria e nazione. Problemi di identità
e di appartenenza
, V. Fiorillo and G. M. Chiodi (eds.), Milan,
FrancoAngeli, pp. 111–43.
––– (ed.), 1996,
Samuel Pufendorf Filosofo
del Diritto e della Politica. Atti del Convegno Internazionale Milano,
11–12 Novembre 1994
, Napoli, La Città di Sole.
–––, 1991,
Tra egoismo e socialitá.
Il giusnaturalismo di Samuel Pufendorf
, Napoli, Jovene.
–––, 1990, “La socialitas nell’
antropologia giuridica Pufendorfiana,”
Materiali per una
storia della cultura giuridica
20(2): 479–95.
–––, 1989, “Von Grotius zu Pufendorf.
Wissenschaftliche Revolution und theoretische Grundlagen des
Rechts,”
Archiv für Rechts- und Sozialphilosophie
75(2): 218–38.
Fiorillo, V., and F. Grunert (eds.), 2009,
Das Naturrecht der
Geselligkeit. Anthropologie, Recht und Politik im 18.
Jahrhundert
, Berlin, Duncker & Humblot.
Forbes, D., 1975, “A Modern Theory of Natural Law,” in
Hume’s Philosophical Politics
, Cambridge, Cambridge U.
Pr., pp. 59–90.
Forde, S., 2011, “ ‘Mixed Modes’ in John
Locke’s Moral and Political Philosophy,”
The Review of
Politics
73(4): 581–608.
Franke, B., 2009, “Samuel von Pufendorf
(1632–1694),” in
Sklaverei und Unfreiheit im
Naturrecht des 17. Jahrhunderts
, New York, Olms, pp.
192–250.
Friedeburg, R. von, 2008, “Church and State in Lutheran
Lands (1550–1675),” in
Lutheran Ecclesiastical Culture
1550–1675
, R. Kolb (ed.), Boston, Brill, pp.
361–410.
––– (ed.), 2005, ‘
Patria’ und
‘Patrioten’ vor dem Patriotismus. Pflichten, Rechte,
Glauben und die Rekonfigurierung europäischer Gemeinwesen im 17.
Jahrhundert
, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz.
Friedeburg, R. von, and M. J. Seidler, 2007, “The Holy Roman
Empire of the German Nation,” in
European Political Thought
1450–1700. Religion, Law and Philosophy
, H. A. Lloyd, G.
Burgess, and S. Hodson (eds.), New Haven, Yale U. Pr., pp.
102–72.
Gaertner, W., 2005, “
De jure naturae et gentium
:
Samuel von Pufendorf’s Contribution to Social Choice Theory and
Economics,”
Social Choice and Welfare
25(2–3):
231–41.
Geyer, B., H. Goerlich, and G. Schliebe (eds.), 1996,
Samuel
Pufendorf und seine Wirkungen bis auf die heutige Zeit
,
Baden-Baden, Nomos.
Godoy, F. P., 2016, “La idea de estado moderno bajo la mira
confesional: Tres censuras a
De iure naturae et gentium
(1672)
de Samuel Pufendorf [The idea of the modern state from a confessional
perspective: Three criticisms of
De jure naturae et gentium
(1672) of Samuel Pufendorf],”
Revista de Estudios
Histórico-Jurídicos
[Sección historia del
pensamiento político] 37: 421–42.
Goyard-Fabre, S., 1994,
Pufendorf et le droit naturel
,
Paris, Presses Universitaires de France.
–––, 1989, “Pufendorf, adversaire de
Hobbes,”
Hobbes Studies
2(1): 65–86.
––– (ed.), 1988,
Des theories du droit
naturel
, Caen, Centre de Publications de
l’Université de Caen.
Grabhill, S., 2006,
Rediscovering the Natural Law in Reformed
Theological Ethics
(Series:
Emory University Studies in Law
and Religion
), Grand Rapids MI, William B. Eerdmans.
Grimsehl, H.-M., 1991, “Samuel Pufendorf und seine Stellung
in der deutschen Frühaufklärung,” in
Frühaufklärung in Deutschland und Polen
, K. Bal, S.
Wollgast, and P. Schellenberger (eds.), Berlin, Akademie, pp.
249–80.
Grote, S., 2018,
The Emergence of Modern Aesthetic Theory:
Religion and Morality in Enlightenment Germany and Scotland
,
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Grunert, F., 2016, “Äußere Norm und inneres
Gewissen: das Gewissen in den Naturrechtslehren von Samuel Pufendorf
und Christian Thomasius,” in
Das Gewissen in den
Rechtslehren der protestantischen und katholischen Reformationen
,
M. Germann and W. Decock (eds), Leipzig, Evangelische Verlagsanstalt, pp.
297–312.
–––, 2004, “ ‘Händel mit Herrn
Hector Gottfried Masio’. Zur Pragmatik des Streits in den
Kontroversen mit dem Kopenhagener Hofprediger,” in
Appell an
das Publikum. Die öffentliche Debatte in der deutschen
Aufklärung
, U. Goldenbaum (ed.), Berlin, Akademie, pp.
119–74.
–––, 2000,
Normbegründung und
politische Legitimität. Zur Rechts- und Staatsphilosophie der
deutschen Frühaufklärung
, Tübingen, Niemeyer.
Haakonssen, K., 2017, “Early Modern Natural Law
Theories,” in
The Cambridge Companion to Natural Law
Jurisprudence
, G. Duke and R. P. George (eds.), Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press, pp. 76–102.
–––, 2012, “Enlightenment and the Ubiquity
of Natural Law,”
Time in the Age of Enlightenment
, W.
Schmale (ed.), Bochum, Dieter Winkler.
–––, 2011, “Natural Law and Personhood:
Samuel Pufendorf on Social Explanation,” European University
Institute, Max Weber Lecture No. 2010/06, CADMUS: EUI Research
Repository:
available online
,
 accessed July 25, 2015.
–––, 2006, “German Natural Law,” in
The Cambridge History of Eighteenth-Century Political
Thought
, M. Goldie and R. Wokler (eds.), New York, Cambridge U.
Pr., pp. 251–90.
–––, 2004, “Protestant Natural Law Theory.
A General Interpretation,” in
New Essays on the History of
Autonomy. A Collection Honoring J.B. Schneewind
, N. Brender and
L. Krasnoff (eds.), New York, Cambridge U. Pr., pp. 92–109.
–––, 2002, “The Moral Conservativism of
Natural Rights,” in Hunter and Saunders (eds.,), pp.
27–42.
––– (ed.), 1999,
Grotius, Pufendorf and
Modern Natural Law
, Brookfield, VT, Ashgate.
–––, 1998, “Divine/Natural Law Theories in
Ethics,” in
The Cambridge History of Seventeenth-Century
Philosophy
, 2 vols., D. Garber and M. Ayers (eds.), Cambridge,
Cambridge U. Pr., Volume 2, pp. 1317–57.
–––, 1996,
Natural Law and Moral Philosophy.
From Grotius to the Scottish Enlightenment
, Cambridge, Cambridge
U. Pr.
–––, 1991, “From Natural Law to the Rights
of Man: a European Perspective on American Debates,” in
A
Culture of Rights. The Bill of Rights in Philosophy, Politics, and Law
– 1791 and 1991
, M. J. Lacey and K. Haakonssen (eds.), New
York, Cambridge U. Pr., 19–61.
Haakonssen, K. and M. J. Seidler, 2015, “Natural Law: Law,
Rights and Duties,” in
A Companion to Intellectual
History
, R. Whatmore and B. Young (eds.), West Sussex, UK, John
Wiley & Sons, pp. 377–401.
Haara, H., 2018,
Pufendorf’s Theory of Sociability:
Passions, Habits and Social Order
, Switzerland, Springer.
–––, 2016, “Pufendorf on Passions and
Sociability,”
Journal of the History of Ideas
77(3):
423–44.
Haara, H. and T. Stuart-Buttle, 2019, “Beyond Justice:
Pufendorf and Locke on the Desire for Esteem,”
Political
Theory
47(5): 699–723.
Haara, H. and A. Lahdenranta, 2018, “Smithian Sentimentalism
Anticipated: Pufendorf on the Desire for Esteem and Moral
Conduct,”
The Journal of Scottish Philosophy
16(1):
19–37.
Haas, J., 2007,
Die Reichstheorie in Pufendorfs
‘Severinus de Monzambano’. Monstrositätsthese und
Reichsdebatte im Spiegel der politisch-juristischen Literatur von 1667
bis heute. Schriften zur Verfassungsgeschichte
, Berlin, Duncker
& Humblot.
Habermann, K. and K.-D. Herbst (eds.), 2016,
Erhard Weigel
(1625–1699) und seine Schüler
, Göttingen,
Universitätsverlag Göttingen.
Hammerstein, N., 1986, “Zum Fortwirken von Pufendorfs
Naturrechtslehre an den Universitäten des Heiligen Römischen
Reiches Deutscher Nation während des 18. Jahrhunderts,” in
Modéer (ed.), pp. 31–51.
–––, 1972,
Jus und Historie : Ein Beitrag
zur Geschichte des historischen Denkens an deutschen
Universitäten im späten 17. und 18. Jahrhundert
,
Göttingen, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Hartung, G., 2009, “Vertragstheorie und Konstruktion der
Souveränität bei Samuel Pufendorf,” in Hüning
(ed.), pp. 36–50.
–––, 2008, “
De essentia legis
: eine
scholastische Frage beschäftigt das Naturrechtsdenken der
Frühaufklärung,” in
Strukturen der deutschen
Frühaufklärung 1680–1720
, H.-E. Bödeker
(ed.), Göttingen, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, pp.
309–31.
–––, 1998,
Die Naturrechtsdebatte.
Geschichte der ‘Obligatio’ vom 17. bis zum 20.
Jahrhundert
, Freiburg/München, Albert.
Heideking, J., 1995, “The Law of Nature and Natural Rights.
Die Positivierung von Naturrecht in Amerika des ausgehenden 18.
Jahrhunderts,” in Dann and Klippel (eds.), pp. 48–60.
Hochstrasser, T. J., 2000,
Natural Law Theories in the Early
Enlightenment
, Cambridge, Cambridge U. Pr.
Hochstrasser, T. J., and P. Schröder (eds.), 2003,
Early
Modern Natural Law Theories. Contexts and Strategies in the Early
Enlightenment
, Dordrecht, Kluwer.
Holland, B., 2017,
The Moral Person of the State. Pufendorfian
Sovereignty and Composite Polities
, Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
–––, 2012, “Pufendorf’s Theory of
Facultative Sovereignty: On the Configuration of the Soul of the
State,”
History of Political Thought
33(3):
427–54.
–––, 2011, “The Moral Person of the State:
Emer de Vattel and the Foundations of International Legal
Order,”
History of European Ideas
37(4):
438–45.
Hont, I., 2005,
Jealousy of Trade. International Competition
and the Nation-State in Historical Perspective
, Cambridge MA,
Belknap Press of Harvard U. Pr.
–––, 1987, “The Language of Sociability
and Commerce: Samuel Pufendorf and the Theoretical Foundations of the
‘Four-Stages’ Theory,” in
The Language of
Political Theory in Early-Modern Europe
, A. Pagden (ed.),
Cambridge, Cambridge U. Pr., pp. 253–76.
Hruschka, J., 2015,
Kant und der Rechtsstaat und andere Essays
zu Kants Rechtslehre und Ethik
, Freiburg, Alber.
–––, 2004, “Zurechnung seit Pufendorf.
Insbesondere die Unterscheidungen des 18. Jahrhunderts,” in
Zurechnung als Operationalisierung von Verantwortung
, M.
Kaufmann and J. Renzikowski (eds.), New York, Peter Lang, pp.
17–27.
–––, 1998a, “Supererogation and
Meritorious Duties,”
Jahrbuch für Recht und Ethik /
Annual Review of Law and Ethics
6: 93–108.
–––, 1998b, “Zurechnung und Notstand.
Begriffsanalysen von Pufendorf bis Daries,” in
Entwicklung
der Methodenlehre in Rechtswissenschaft und Philosophie vom 16. bis
zum 18. Jahrhundert
, J. Schröder (ed.), Stuttgart, Steiner,
pp. 163–76.
–––, 1986, “Das deontologische Sechseck
bei Gottfried Achenwall im Jahre 1767. Zur Geschichte der deontischen
Grundbegriffe in der Universaljurisprudenz zwischen Suarez und
Kant,”
Berichte ... Joachim Jungius-Gesellschaft der
Wissenschaften
4(2): 3–71.
Hüning, D., 2015, “Gesetz und Verbindlichkeit. Zur
Begründung der praktischen Philosophie bei Samuel Pufendorf und
Christian Wolff,” in
Das Band der Gesellschaft.
Verbindlichkeitsdiskurse im 18. Jahrhundert
, S. Bunke, K.
Mihaylova and D. Ringkamp (eds.), Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck, pp.
37–57.
––– (ed.), 2009a,
Naturrecht und
Staatstheorie bei Samuel Pufendorf
, Baden-Baden, Nomos.
–––, 2009b, “Souveränität und
Strafgewalt. Die Begründung des
jus puniendi
bei Samuel
Pufendorf,” in Hüning (ed.), pp. 71–93.
–––, 2002a, “Gesetz und Verbindlichkeit.
Zur Begründung der praktischen Philosophie bei Samuel Pufendorf
und Christian Wolff,” in
Gedächtnisschrift für
Dieter Meurer
, E. Graul and G. Wolff (eds.), Berlin, Gruyter, pp.
525–44.
–––, 2002b, “Die Grenzen der Toleranz und
die Rechtsstellung der Atheisten. Der Streit um die Verbindlichkeit
des natürlichen Gesetzes in der neuzeitlichen
Naturrechtslehre,” in
Säkularisierung in den
Wissenschaften seit der Frühen Neuzeit
, 3 vols., Volume 2:
Zwischen christlicher Apologetik und methologischem Atheismus.
Wissenschaftsprozesse im Zeitraum von 1500 bis 1800
, L.
Danneberg, S. Pott, J. Schönert, and F. Vollhardt (eds.), Berlin,
Gruyter, pp. 219–73.
Hull, I. V., 1996,
Sexuality, State, and Civil Society in
Germany, 1700–1815
, Ithaca, Cornell U. Pr., esp. pp.
155–97.
Hunger, W., 1991,
Samuel von Pufendorf. Aus dem Leben und Werk
eines deutschen Frühaufklärers
, Flöha, Verlag
Druck & design.
Hunter, I., 2019, “The Invention of Human Nature: the
Intention and Reception of Pufendorf’s
entia
moralia
,”
History of European Ideas
45(7):
933–52.
–––, 2015, “Secularization: The Birth of a
Modern Combat Concept,”
Modern Intellectual History
12(1), 1–32.
–––, 2014, “The Law of Nature and of
Nations,” in
The Routledge Companion to Eighteenth-Century
Philosophy
, A. Garrett (ed.), New York, Routledge, pp.
559–92.
–––, 2013a, “The Figure of Man and the
Territorialisation of Justice in ‘Enlightenment’ Natural
Law: Pufendorf and Vattel,”
Intellectual History Review
23(3): 289–307.
–––, 2013b, “Kant and Vattel in Context:
Cosmopolitan Philosophy and Diplomatic Casuistry,”
History
of European Ideas
39(4): 477–502.
–––, 2010, “Vattel’s Law of Nations:
Diplomatic Casuistry for the Protestant Nation,”
Grotiana
31: 108–40.
–––, 2007a, “Natural Law, Historiography,
and Aboriginal Sovereignty,”
Legal History
11(2):
137–68.
–––, 2007b,
The Secularisation of the
Confessional State: The Political Thought of Christian Thomasius
Cambridge, Cambridge U. Pr.
–––, 2005, “Kant’s
Religion
and Prussian Religious Policy,”
Modern Intellectual
History
2(1): 1–27.
–––, 2004, “Conflicting Obligations:
Pufendorf, Leibniz and Barbeyrac on Civil Authority,”
History of Political Thought
25(4): 670–99.
–––, 2003a, “The Love of a Sage or the
Command of a Superior: The Natural Law Doctrines of Leibniz and
Pufendorf,” in Hochstrasser and Schroeder (eds.), pp.
169–91.
–––, 2002, “The Morals of Metaphysics:
Kant’s
Groundwork
as Intellectual Paideia,”
Critical Inquiry
28: 908–929.
–––, 2001,
Rival Enlightenments: Civil and
Metaphysical Philosophy in Early Modern Germany
, Cambridge,
Cambridge U. Pr.
Hunter, I. and R. Whatmore (eds.), 2019,
Philosophy, Rights
and Natural Law. Essays in Honour of Knud Haakonssen
, Edinburgh,
University of Edinburgh Press.
Hunter, I., and D. Saunders (eds.), 2002,
Natural Law and
Civil Sovereignty. Moral Right and State Authority in Early Modern
Political Thought
, New York, Palgrave Macmillan.
Ikadatsu, Y., 2002,
Der Paradigmawechsel der
Privatrechtstheorie und die Neukonstruktion der Vertragstheorie in
seinem Rahmen : Pufendorf, Wolff, Kant und Savigny
, Ebelsbach,
Aktiv Druck & Verlag.
Irwin, T., 2011a, “Pufendorf,” in
The Development
of Ethics. A Historical and Critical Study
, 3 vols., Volume II:
From Suarez to Rousseau
, New York, Oxford U. Pr., pp.
284–311.
–––, 2011b, “Pufendorf and Natural
Law,” in
The Development of Ethics. A Historical and
Critical Study
, 3 vols., Volume II:
From Suarez to
Rousseau
, New York, Oxford U. Pr., pp. 332–52.
Jägerskiöld, S., 1985, “Samuel von Pufendorf in
Schweden, 1668–1688. Einige Neue Beiträge,” in
Satura Roberto Feenstra
, J. A. Ankum, J. E. Spruit, and F. B.

J. Wubbe (eds.), Friburg, SW, University Pr., pp. 557–70.
Johns, C., 2013, “Leibniz, Pufendorf, and the Possibility of
Moral Self-Governance,”
British Journal for the History of
Philosophy
21(2): 281–301.
Kelsay, J., 2012, “Islam and Christianity in the Works of
Gentili, Grotius, and Pufendorf,” in
Just Wars, Holy Wars,
and Jihads: Christian, Jewish and Muslim Encounters and
Exchanges
, S. H. Hashemi (ed.), New York, Oxford U. Pr., pp.
207–18.
Kersting, W., 2006, “Politics,” in
The Cambridge
History of Eighteenth-Century Philosophy
, 2 vols., K. Haakonssen
(ed.), New York, Cambridge U. Pr., Volume 2, Ch. 34, pp.
1026–1068.
Kingsbury, B. and B. Straumann, 2010, “The State of Nature
and Commercial Sociability in Early Modern International Legal
Thought,”
Grotiana
31: 22–43.
Kirby, J. T., 2014,
Natural Law in the Encyclopédie
(1751–1772)
, Ph.D. dissertation, U. of Manchester, UK.
Klippel, D., 2012,
Naturrecht und Rechtsphilosophie im 19.
Jahrhundert. Eine Bibliographie, 1780 bis 1850
, Tübingen,
Mohr-Siebeck.
–––, 2009 “Das deutsche Naturrecht am Ende
des 18. Jahrhunderts,” in Fiorillo and Grunert (eds.), pp.
301–325.
–––, 1997,
Naturrecht im 19. Jahrhundert:
Kontinuität, Inhalt, Funktion, Wirkung
, Goldbach, Keip.
Klippel, D., and E. Müller-Luckner (eds.), 2006,
Naturrecht und Staat. Politische Funktionen des Europäischen
Naturrechts
. München, Oldenbourgh.
Kobusch, T., 1996, “Pufendorfs Lehre vom moralischen
Sein,” in Palladini and Hartung (eds.), pp. 63–73.
–––, 1990, “Die Kategorien der Freiheit:
Stationen einer historischen Entwicklung: Pufendorf, Kant,
Chalybäus,”
Allgemeine Zeitschrift für
Philosophie
15(1): 13–37.
Korsgaard, C. M., 1996, with G. A Cohen, R. Geuss, T. Nagel, and
B. Williams,
The Sources of Normativity
, O. O’Neill
(ed.), New York, Cambridge U. Pr.
Koskenniemi, M., 2011, “ ‘International
Community’ from Dante to Vattel,” in
Vattel’s
International Law in a XXIst Century Perspective / Le droit
international de Vattel vu du XXIe siècle
, V. Chetail and
P. Haggenmacher (eds.), Boston, Nijhoff, pp. 51–75.
–––, 2009, “Miserable Comforters:
International Relations as New Natural Law,”
European
Journal of International Relations
15(3): 395–422.
–––, 2007, “ ‘Not excepting the
Iroquois themselves ...’ Machiavelli, Pufendorf and the
Prehistory of International Law,” European U. Institute, Max
Weber Lecture No. 2007/07, CADMUS: EUI Research Repository:
available online
,
 accessed July 25, 2015.
Kratochwil, S., 2016, “Gottfried Klinger,” in K.
Habermann and K.-D. Herbst (eds.), pp. 75–83.
Krawczuk, W., 2014,
Samuel Pufendorf and Some Stories of the
Northern War 1655–1660
, Krakow, Jagiellonian University
Press, Columbia University Press.
Krieger, L., 1965,
The Politics of Discretion. Pufendorf and
the Acceptance of Natural Law
, Chicago, U. of Chicago Pr.
–––, 1960, “History and Law in the
Seventeenth Century: Pufendorf,”
Journal of the History of
Ideas
21: 198–210.
–––, 1957,
The German Idea of Freedom.
History of a Political Tradition
, Chicago, U. of Chicago Pr.
Labriola, G. M., 2003,
Barbeyrac interprete di Pufendorf e
Grozio: dalla costruzione della sovranità alla teoria della
resistenza
, Napoli, Editoriale Scientifica.
Lagerspetz, E., 1986, “Pufendorf on Collective
Decisions,”
Public Choice
49: 179–82.
Laurent, P., 1982,
Pufendorf et la loi naturelle
, Paris,
Vrin.
Lehmann, R. M., 2013,
Die Transformation des Kirchenbegriffs
in der Frühaufklärung
, Tübingen, Mohr
Siebeck.
Lindberg, B., 1976,
Naturrätten i Uppsala
1655–1720. Mit einer deutschen Zusammenfassung
, Stockholm,
LiberTryck.
Linklater, A., 1980, “Rationality and Obligation in the
States-System: the Lessons of Pufendorf’s Law of Nations,”
Millennium: Journal of International Studies
9(3):
215–28.
Lipscomb, B. J. B., 2005, “Power and Authority in
Pufendorf,”
History of Philosophy Quarterly
22(3):
201–20.
Luig, K., 1996, “Von Samuel Pufendorf zu Christian
Thomasius,” in Palladini and Hartung (eds.), pp.
137–46.
–––, 1972, “Zur Verbreitung des
Naturrechts in Europa,”
Tijdschrift voor
Rechtsgeschiedenis
60(2): 539–57.
Luna-Fabritius, A., 2020, “Pufendorf’s Sociability in
(Italian) Translation,” in
Passions, Politics and the Limits
of Society
, H. Haara, K. Stapelbroek and M. Immanen (eds.),
Berlin, Gruyter / Oldenbourg, pp. 235–58.
Lutterbeck, K. –G., 2009, “Pufendorfs Unterscheidung
von physischem und moralischem Sein und seine politische
Theorie,” in Hüning (ed.), pp. 19–35.
–––, 2002,
Staat und Gesellschaft bei
Christian Thomasius und Christian Wolff
, Stuttgart-Bad Canstatt,
Frommann-Holzboog.
McAdam, J. I., 1963, “Rousseau and the Friends of
Despotism,”
Ethics
74(1): 34–43.
Maier, H., 1962, “Die Lehre der Politik and den deutschen
Universitäten vornehmlich vom 16. bis 18. Jahrhundert,” in
Wissenschaftliche Politik. Eine Einführung in Grundfragen
ihrer Tradition und Theorie
, D. Oberndörfer (ed.), 2nd ed.,
Freiburg, Rombach, pp. 59–116.
Malettke, K., 2006, “L’historiographie de Samuel
Pufendorf (1632–1694): Son Traité sur la Constitution du
Saint-Empire,” in
Les historiographes en Europe de la fin du
Moyen Age à la Révolution
, C. Grell (ed.), Paris,
Presses de l’Universitaires Paris-Sorbonne, pp.
345–55.
Martin, G., 2009,
Recht auf Lüge, Lüge als Pflicht.
Zu Begriff, ldeengeschichte und Praxis der politischen edlen
Lüge
, München, Utz.
Mautner, T., 2005, “Grotius and the Skeptics,”
Journal of the History of Ideas
66(4): 577–601.
–––, 2000, “From Virtue to Morality:
Antoine Le Grand (1629–1699) and the New Moral
Philosophy,”
Jahrbuch für Recht und Ethik / Review of
Law and Ethics
8: 209–32.
–––, 1991, “Pufendorfs Place in the
History of Rights-Concepts,” in
Revolution and Enlightenment
in Europe
, T. O’Hagan (ed.), Aberdeen, Aberdeen U. Pr., pp.
13–22.
–––, 1989, “Pufendorf and the
Correlativity Theory of Rights,” in
‘In so many
words’: Philosophical Essays dedicated to Sven Danielsson on tbe
Occasion of His Fiftieth Birthday
, S. Lindstrom and W. Rabinowicz
(eds.), (Series:
Philosophical Studies
, No. 42), Uppsala,
Philosophical Society & Dept. of Philosophy, U. of Uppsala, pp.
37–59.
Meinecke, F., 1998, “Pufendorf,” in
Machiavellism:
The Doctrine of raison d’état and Its Place in Modern
History
, New Brunswick, Transaction Publishers, pp. 224–43;
translation of Meinecke 1925.
–––, 1925, “Pufendorf,” in
Die
Idee der Staatsräson in der neueren Geschichte
, Berlin, R.
Oldenbourg, pp. 279–303.
Meyer, P., 1894,
Samuel Pufendorf. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte
seines Lebens
, Grimma, Julius Schiertz.
Modéer, K. Ä. (ed.), 1986,
Samuel von Pufendorf
1632–1982. Ett Rättshistoriskt Symposium i Lund 15–16
Januari 1982
, Lund, Blom.
Mohnhaupt, H., 2008, “
Lex certa
and
ius
certum
: The Search for Legal Certainty and Security,” in
Daston and Stolleis (eds.), pp. 73–88.
Moore, J., 2006, “Natural Rights in the Scottish
Enlightenment,” in
The Cambridge History of
Eighteenth-Century Political Thought
, M. Goldie and R. Wokler
(eds.), New York, Cambridge U. Pr., pp. 291–316.
Moore, J., and M. Silverthorne, 1995, “Protestant
Theologies, Limited Sovereignties: Natural Law and the Conditions of
Union in the German Empire, the Netherlands and Great Britain,”
in
A Union for Empire. Political Thought and the British Union of
1707
, J. Robertson (ed.), Cambridge, Cambridge U. Pr.,
171–97.
–––, 1983, “Gershom Carmichael and the
Natural Jurisprudence Tradition in Eighteenth-Century Scotland,”
in
Wealth and Virtue: The Shaping of Political Economy in the
Scottish Enlightenment
, I. Hont and M. Ignatieff (eds.),
Cambridge, Cambridge U. Pr., pp. 73–87.
Moraes, B. B. Q. d., 2016, “Family Law from Pufendorf to the
Twenty-first Century: Systems and Microsystems,”
Forum
Historia Juris
, at http://www.forhistiur.de/2016-04-moraes/,
accessed January 7, 2021.
Müller, S., 2011, “Samuel von Pufendorfs Stärkung
des neuzeitlichen Autonomiegedankens: Naturrechtliche Erkenntnis als
actio humana
,”
Theologische Quartalschrift
191(3): 242–59.
–––, 2000,
Gibt es Menschenrechte bei Samuel
Pufendorf?
Frankfurt am Main, Peter Lang.
Mulsow, M., 2016, “John Selden in Germany: Religion and
Natural Law from Boecler to Buddeus (1665–1695),” in
For the
Sake of Learning. Essays in Honor of Anthony Grafton
, A. Blair
and A. -S. Goeing (eds.), Boston, Brill, vol. 1, pp.
286–308.
Niederberger, A., 2010, “Die Grenzen und Möglichkeiten
kosmopolitanen Rechts in den Schriften von Hugo Grotius, Samuel von
Pufendorf und Émer de Vattel,” in
Kosmopolitanismus.
Zur Geschichte und Zukunft eines umstrittenen Ideals
, M.
Lutz-Bachmann, A. Niederberger, and P. Schink (eds.), Göttingen,
Velbrück Wissenschaft, pp. 101–21.
Niedermann, J., 1941,
Kultur. Werden und Wandlungen des
Begriffs und seiner Ersatzbegriffe von Cicero bis Herder
,
Florence, Librana Antiquaria, pp. 132–74.
Niléhn, L., 1986, “On the Use of Natural Law. Samuel
von Pufendorf as Royal Swedish State Historian,” in
Modéer (ed.), pp. 52–70.
Nine, C., 2018. “Rights to the Oceans: Foundational
Arguments Reconsidered,”
Journal of Applied Philosophy
36(4): 626–42.
Nutkiewicz, M., 1983, “Samuel Pufendorf: Obligation as the
Basis of the State,”
Journal of the History of
Philosophy
21(1): 15–29.
Oakley, F., 2015,
The Watershed of Modern Politics. Law,
Virtue, Kingship, and Consent (1300–1650)
, New Haven, Yale
U. Pr.
–––, 2005,
Natural Law, Laws of Nature,
Natural Rights: Continuity and Discontinuity in the History of
Ideas
, New York / London, Continuum.
Olivecrona, K., and T. Mautner, 2010, “The Two Levels in
Natural Law Thinking,”
Jurisprudence
1(2):
197–224.
Othmer, S. C., 1970,
Berlin und die Verbreitung des
Naturrechts in Europa. Kultur- und sozialgeschichtliche Studien zu
Jean Barbeyracs Pufendorf-Übersetzungen und eine Analyse seiner
Leserschaft
, Berlin, Gruyter.
Ottmann, H., 2006, “Deutsche Frühaufklärung
(Pufendorf, Thomasius, Wolff),” in
Geschichte des
politischen Denkens
, 4 vols., Volume 3.1:
Von Machiavelli bis
zu den großen Revolutionen
, Stuttgart, Metzler, pp.
404–31.
Paasch, K., 2005,
Die Bibliothek des Johann Christian von
Boineburg (1622–1672). Ein Beitrag zur Bibliotheksgeschichte des
Polyhistorismus
(Series:
Berliner Arbeiten zur
Bibliothekswissenschaft
, No. 16), Berlin, Logos.
Palladini, F., 2020,
Samuel Pufendorf – Disciple of
Hobbes. For a Reinterpretation of Modern Natural Law
, D. Saunders
(trans.), Leiden, Brill.
–––, 2014, “Adam Ebert und sein verbotener
Kommentar zu Pufendorfs
Monzambano
,”
Forschungen zur
brandenburgischen und preussischen Geschichte
24(2):
195–205.
–––, 2011,
Die Berliner Hugenotten und der
Fall Barbeyracs. Orthodoxie und ‘Sozinianer’ im Refuge
(1685–1720)
, Leiden, Brill.
–––, 2008, “Pufendorf Disciple of Hobbes:
The Nature of Man and the State of Nature: The Doctrine of
Socialitas
,”
History of European Ideas
34:
26–60.
–––, 2003, “Ein Vergessener
Pufendorf-Übersetzer: Der Réfugié Antoine
Teissier,” in
The Berlin Refuge 1680–1780. Learning
and Science in European Context
, S. Pott, M. Mulsow, and L.
Dannenberg (eds.), Leiden, Brill, pp. 113–35.
–––, 2002, “Pufendorf and Stoicism,”
Grotiana
22/23: 245–55.
–––, 2001, “Pufendorf on Milton and
Divorce,”
Neulateinisches Jahrbuch / Journal of Neo-Latin
Language and Literature
3: 117–24.
–––, 2000, “Dieu n’est pas un tyran:
toute-puissance divine, grâce et liberté de l’homme
chez Samuel Pufendorf,” in
Potentia Dei
.
L’onnipotenza divina nel pensiero dei secoli XVI e XVII
, G.
Canziani, M. A. Granada, and Y. C. Zarka (eds.), Milano, Franco
Angeli, pp. 513–24.
–––, 1999a,
La Biblioteca di Samuel
Pufendorf
, Wiesbaden, Harrassowitz.
–––, 1999b, “Pufendorf e
Machiavelli,” in
Storia, Filosofia e Letteratura. Studi in
onore di Gennaro Sasso
, M. Herling and M. Reale (eds.), Napoli,
Bibliopolis, pp. 355–72.
–––, 1997a. “Un nemico di S. Pufendorf:
Johann Heinrich Böcler (1611–1672)”,
Ius
Commune
24: 133–52.
–––, 1997b, “Stato, chiesa e tolleranza
nel pensiero di S. Pufendorf,”
Rivista Storica Italiana
109(2): 436–82.
–––, 1993, “Samuel Pufendorf als
Moralphilosoph,”
Jahrbuch für Recht und Ethik
8:
199–207.
–––, 1990,
Samuel Pufendorf discepolo di
Hobbes. Per una reinterpretazione del giusnaturalismo moderno
,
Bologna, Il Mulino.
–––, 1984, “S. Pufendorf lettore di
Guicciardini,”
La Cultura
22(1): 44–93.
–––, 1981, “Lucrezio in Pufendorf,”
La Cultura
19(1): 110–49.
–––, 1978,
Discussioni seicentesche su
Samuel Pufendorf. Scritti Latini: 1663–1700
, Milan,
Mulino.
Palladini, F., and G. Hartung (eds.), 1996,
Samuel Pufendorf
und die europäische Frühaufklärung. Werk und
Einfluß eines deutschen Bürgers der Gelehrtenrepublik nach
300 Jahren (1694–1994)
, Berlin, Akademie.
Parkin, J., and T. Stanton, (eds.), 2013,
Natural Law and
Toleration in the Early Enlightenment
, Oxford, Oxford U. Pr.
Pasquino, P., 2010, “Samuel Pufendorf: Majority Rule (Logic,
Justification and Limits),”
Social Science Information
(Special Issue: Rules of Collective Decision) 49(1):
99–109.
–––, 1986, “Politisches und historisches
Interesse: ‘Statistik’ und historische Staatslehre bei
Gottfried Achenwall (1719–1772),” in
Aufklärung
und Geschichte. Studien zur deutschen Geschichtswissenschaft im 18.
Jahrhundert
, H. –E. Bödeker, G. G. Iggers, J. B.
Knudsen, and P. Reill (eds.), Göttingen, Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht, pp. 144–68.
Phillipson, C., 1914, “Samuel Pufendorf,” in
Great
Jurists of the World
, J. MacDonell and E. Manson (eds.), New
York, Kelley, pp. 305–44.
Piirimäe, E., and Alexander Schmidt, 2015,
History of
European Ideas
41(5), Special Issue: “Sociability in
Enlightenment Thought.”
Piirimäe, P., 2017, “Official Historiography and the
State in Early Modern Europe,”
Storia della
Storiografia
71(1): 47–75.
–––, 2010, “The Westphalian Myth and the
Idea of External Sovereignty,” in
Sovereignty in Fragments.
The Past, Present and Future of a Contested Concept
, H. Kalmo and
Q. Skinner (eds.), New York, Cambridge U. Pr., pp. 64–80.
–––, 2008, “Politics and History: An
Unholy Alliance? Samuel Pufendorf as Official Historiographer,”
in
Rund um die Meere des Nordens. Festschrift für Hain
Rebas
, M. Engelbrecht, U. Hanssen-Decker, and D. Höffker
(eds.), Heyde, Boyen, pp. 237–52.
Pillet, A. and D. Alland (eds.), 2014),
Les fondateurs du
droit international
, Paris, Panthéon-Assas.
Pink, T., 2009, “Natural Law and the Theory of Moral
Obligation,” in
Psychology and Philosophy
, S.
Heinämaa and M. Reuter (eds.), London, Springer, pp.
97–114.
Rabe, H., 1958,
Naturrecht und Kirche bei Samuel von
Pufendorf: Eine Untersuchung der naturrechtlichen Einflüsse auf
den Kirchenbegriff Pufendorfs als Studie zur Entstehung des modernen
Denkens
, Tübingen, Osiander.
Ramelet, L., 2020, “Pufendorf’s Solution to the Puzzle
of Consent and Natural Law,”
History of Political
Thought
41(2): 299–323.
Reibstein, E., 1955, “Pufendorfs
Völkerrechtslehre,”
Österreichische Zeitschrift
für öffentliches Recht
7(4): 43–72.
–––, 1953–54, “Deutsche
Grotius-Kommentatoren bis zu Christian Wolff,”
Zeitschrift
für ausländisches und öffentliches Recht und
Völkerrecht
15: 76–102.
Ribeiro, R., 2019, “Hugo Grotius and Samuel Pufendorf on
Last Wills and Testaments,”
Grotiana
40:
146–64.
Riches, D., 2016, “Eberhard von Danckelman and
Brandenburg’s Foreign Policy (1688–97),” in
Secretaries & Statecraft in the Early Modern World
, P. M.
Dover (ed.), Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press, pp.
254–72.
–––, 2013,
Protestant Cosmopolitanism and
Diplomatic Culture. Brandenburg-Swedish Relations in the Seventeenth
Century
, Leiden, Brill.
–––, 2004, “The Rise of Confessional
Tension in Brandenburg’s Relations with Sweden in the Late
Seventeenth Century,”
Central European History
37(4):
568–92.
Riklin, A., 2006,
Machtteilung: Geschichte der
Mischverfassung
, Darmstadt, Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft,
pp. 203–23.
Rinkens, H., 1971,
Die Ehe und die Auffassung von der Natur
des Menschen im Naturrecht bei Hugo Grotius (1583–1648), Samuel
Pufendorf (1632–1694) und Christian Thomasius
(1655–1728)
, Ph.D. dissertation, Johann Wolfgang
Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt-am-Main.
Ritter, M., 1919, “Guicciardini, Richelieu, Chemnitz,
Pufendorf,” in
Die Entwicklung der Geschichtswissenschaft an
den Führenden Werken Betrachtet
, München / Berlin,
Oldenbourg, Ch. 3, pp. 187–204.
Röd, W., 1969, “Erhard Weigels Lehre von den
entia
moralia
,”
Archiv für Geschichte der
Philosophie
51(1): 58–84.
–––, 1970,
Geometrischer Geist und
Naturrecht. Methodengeschichtliche Untersuchungen zur
Staatsphilosophie im 17. und 18. Jahrhundert
, München,
Beck.
Rödding, H., 1912,
Pufendorf als Historiker und Politiker
in den
Commentarii de rebus gestis Frideri Tertii, Halle,
Niemeyer.
Rüdiger, A., 2010, “Produktive Negativität. Die
Rolle des Perfektionismus im deutschen Aufklärungsdenken zwischen
Pufendorf und Kant,”
Deutsche Zeitschrift für
Philosophie
58(1): 721–40.
Saastamoinen, K., 2010, “Pufendorf on Natural Equality,
Human Dignity, and Self-Esteem,”
Journal of the History of
Ideas
71 (1): 39–62.
–––, 2006, “Liberty and Natural Rights in
Pufendorf’s Natural Law Theory,” in
Transformations in
Medieval and Early-Modern Rights Discourse
, V. Mäkinen and
P. Korkman (eds.), Dordrecht, Springer, pp. 225–55.
–––, 1999/2000, “Pufendorf and the Stoic
Model of Natural Law,”
Grotiana
20/21:
257–70.
–––, 1995,
The Morality of the Fallen Man.
Samuel Pufendorf on Natural Law
, Helsinki, Finish Historical
Society.
Salter, J., 1980, “Grotius and Pufendorf on the Right of
Necessity,”
History of Political Thought
26(2):
284–302.
Saunders, D., 2009, “Hegemon History: Pufendorf’s
Shifting Perspectives on France and French Power,” in
War,
the State and International Law in Seventeenth-Century Europe
, O.
Asbach and P. Schröder (eds.), Burlington, VT, Ashgate, pp.
211–30.
Saunders, D., and I. Hunter, 2003, “Bringing the State to
England: Andrew Tooke’s Translation of Samuel Pufendorf’s
De officio hominis et civis
,”
History of Political
Thought
24(2): 218–34.
Scattola, M., 2011, “Scientific revolution in the moral
sciences: The controversy between Samuel Pufendorf and the Lutheran
theologians in the late seventeenth century,” in
Controversies within the Scientific Revolution
, M. Dascal and
V. D. Boantza (eds.), Amsterdam, John Benjamins, pp.
251–75.
–––, 2009a, “Demokratievorstellungen der
Frühen Neuzeit,”
Zeitschrift des Max-Planck-Instituts
für Europäische Rechtsgeschichte
15: 77–98.
–––, 2009b, “Pufendorf und die Tradition
der Mischverfassung,” in Hüning (ed.), pp.
97–125.
–––, 2009c, “ ‘Scientia Iuris and
Ius Naturae’: The Jurisprudence of the Holy Roman Empire in the
Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries,” in
A History of the
Philosophy of Law in the Civil Law World, 1600–1900
, D.
Canale, P. Grossi, and H. Hofmann (eds.), New York, Springer, Chapter
1, pp.: 1–41.
–––, 1999,
Das Naturrecht vor dem
Naturrecht. Zur Geschichte des ‘Ius Naturae’ im 16.
Jahrhundert
, Tübingen, Niemeyer.
Schino, A. L., 2014, “Weigel e Pufendorf: metodo analitico e
diritto naturale,”
Rivista di Filosofia
15(1):
65–90.
–––, 1995,
Il pensiero politico di
Pufendorf
, Roma, Laterza.
Schmidt, F.-S., 2007,
Praktisches Naturrecht zwischen
Thomasius und Wolff: Der Völkerrechtler Adam Friedrich Glafey
(1692–1753)
, Baden-Baden, Nomos.
Schmidt-Biggemann, W., 1999, “Samuel von Pufendorf.
Staats-und Rechtsphilosophie zwischen Barock und
Aufklärung,” in
Philosophen des 17. Jahrhunderts. Eine
Einführung
, L. Kreimendahl (ed.), Darmstadt,
Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, pp. 113–33.
Schmoeckel, M., 2014,
Das Recht der Reformation: die
epistemologische Revolution der Wissenschaft und die Spaltung der
Rechtsordnung in der Frühen Neuzeit
, Tübingen, Mohr
Siebeck.
–––, 2013a, “Zum Ende konfessioneller
Prägungen. Franz Schmier, Karl Anton v. Martini und die
Pufendorf-Rezeption in Oesterreich,” in
Festschrift für
Jan Schröder zum 70. Geburtstag
, A. Kiehnle, B. Mertens, and
G. Schiemann (eds.), Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck, pp.
585–605.
–––, 2013b, “Pufendorfs Vernunftrecht und
die lutherische Erkenntnislehre,” in
Naturrecht und Staat in
der Neuzeit. Diethelm Klippel zum 70. Geburtstag
, J. Eisfeld, M.
Otto, L. Pahlow, and M. Zwanger (eds.), Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck,
pp. 57–79.
Schneewind, J. B., 2010,
Essays on the History of Moral
Philosophy
, New York: Oxford U. Pr.
–––, 2009, “Good Out of Evil: Kant and the
Idea of Unsocial Sociability,” in
Kant’s ‘Idea
for a Universal History with a Cosmopolitan Aim’. A Critical
Guide
, A. O. Rorty and J. Schmidt (eds.), New York, Cambridge U.
Pr., pp. 94–111.
–––, 1998,
The Invention of Autonomy: A
History of Modern Moral Philosophy
, New York, Cambridge U.
Pr.
–––, 1996a, “Barbeyrac and Leibniz on
Pufendorf,” in Palladini and Hartung (eds.), pp.
181–89.
–––, 1996b, “Voluntarism and the
Foundations of Ethics,”
Proceedings and Addresses of the
American Philosophical Association
70(2): 25–41.
–––, 1993, “Kant and Natural Law
Ethics,”
Ethics
104: 53–74.
–––, 1987, “Pufendorf’s Place in the
History of Ethics.”
Synthese
72(1): 123–55.
Schneider, H.-P., 2001, “Christliches Naturrecht,” in
Die Philosophie des 17. Jahrhunderts,
Band 4:
Das Heilige
Römische Reich Deutscher Nation. Nord- und Ostmitteleuropa
,
H. Holzhey, W. Schmidt-Biggemann and V. Mudroch (eds.), Basel, Schwabe
& Co., pp. 813–35.
Schneiders, W., 1971,
Naturrecht und Liebesethik. Zur
Geschichte der praktischen Philosophie im Hinblick auf Christian
Thomasius
, Hildesheim, Olms.
Schröder, J., 2010,
Jan Schröder: Rechtswissenschaft
in der Neuzeit. Geschichte, Theorie, Methode. Ausgewählte
Aufsätze 1976–2009
, T. Finkenauer, C. Peterson, and M.
Stolleis (eds.), Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck.
–––, 2008, “The Concept of (Natural) Law
in the Doctrine of Law and Natural Law of the Early Modern Era,”
in L. Daston and M. Stolleis (eds.), pp. 57–71.
–––, 2006, “Politische Aspekte des
Naturrechts in der zweiten Hälfte des 17. Jahrhunderts,” in
Klippel and Müller-Luckner (eds.), pp. 19–34.
–––, 2000, “Die Entstehung des modernen
Völkerrechtsbegriffs im Naturrecht der frühen
Neuzeit,”
Jahrbuch für Recht und Ethik
8:
47–71.
Schröder, P., 2017,
Trust in Early Modern International
Political Thought, 1598–1713
, Cambridge, UK, Cambridge
University Press, pp. 119–36.
–––, 2012, “Carl Schmitt’s
Appropriation of the Early Modern European Tradition of Political
Thought on the State and Interstate Relations,”
History of
Political Thought
33(2): 348–71.
–––, 2009, “Reichsverfassung und
Souveränität bei Samuel Pufendorf,” in Hüning
(ed.), pp. 126–37.
–––, 2001, “Naturrecht in der
Encyclopédie
,” in
Formen internationaler
Beziehungen in der Frühen Neuzeit
, S. Externbrink and J.
Ulbert (eds.), Berlin, Duncker & Humblot, pp. 77–92.
–––, 1999, “The Constitution of the Holy
Roman Empire After 1648: Samuel Pufendorf’s Assessment in His
Monzambano
,”
The Historical Journal
42(4):
961–83.
Schwartzberg, M., 2008, “Voting the General Will. Rousseau
on Decision Rules,”
Political Theory
36(3):
403–23.
Seelmann, K., 2000, “Theologische Wurzeln des säkularen
Naturrechts. Das Beispiel Salamanca,” in
Die Begründung
des Rechts als historisches Problem
, D. Willoweit and E.
Müller-Luckner (eds.), München: Oldenbourg, pp.
215–227.
Seidler, M. J., 2018, “Economising Natural Law: Pufendorf on
Moral Quantities and Sumptuary Legislation,” in
Philosophy,
Rights and Natural Law. Essays in Honour of Knud Haakonssen
, I.
Hunter and R. Whatmore (eds.), Edinburgh, Edinburgh University Press,
pp. 241–77.
–––, 2015, “Der Begriff des
Völkerrechts bei Samuel Pufendorf,” M. Raeber (trans.), in
Völkerrechtsphilosophie der Frühaufklärung
, T.
Altwicker, F. Cheneval, and O. Diggelmann, Tübingen, Mohr
Siebeck, pp. 61–78.
–––, 2013, “Introductory Essay,” in
An Introduction to the History of the Principal Kingdoms and
States of Europe
, J. Crull (trans.), M. J. Seidler (ed.),
Indianapolis, Liberty Fund, pp. ix–xl.
–––, 2011, “ ‘Monstrous’
Pufendorf: Sovereignty and System in the
Dissertations
,” in
Monarchism and Absolutism in
Early Modern Europe
, C. Cuttica and G. Burgess (eds.), London,
Pickering & Chatto, pp. 159–75.
–––, 2007, “Introduction,” in
Samuel Pufendorf: The Present State of Germany
, E. Bohun
(trans.), M. J. Seidler (ed.), Indianapolis, Liberty Fund, pp.
ix–xxvii.
–––, 2005, “ ‘Wer mir gutes thut,
den liebe ich’: Pufendorf on Patriotism and Political
Loyalty,” in Friedeburg (ed.), pp. 335–65.
–––, 2003, “The Politics of
Self-Preservation: Toleration and Identity in Pufendorf and
Locke,” in Hochstrasser and Schröder (eds.), pp.
227–55.
–––, 2002, “Pufendorf and the Politics of
Recognition,” in Hunter and Saunders (eds.), pp.
235–51.
–––, 2001, “Qualification and Standing in
Pufendorf’s Two English Revolutions,” in
Widerstandsrecht in der frühen Neuzeit. Erträge und
Perspektiven der Forschung im deutsch-britischen Vergleich
,
Friedeburg (ed.), Berlin, Duncker & Humblot, pp.
329–51.
–––, 1997, “Natural Law and History:
Pufendorf’s Philosophical Historiography,” in
History
and the Disciplines. The Reclassification of Knowledge in Early Modern
Europe
, D. R. Kelley (ed.), Rochester, NY, U. of Rochester Pr.,
pp. 203–22.
–––, 1996, “‘Turkish Judgment’
and the English Revolution: Pufendorf on the Right of
Resistance,” in Palladini and Hartung (eds.), pp.
83–104.
–––, 1993, “Religion, Populism, and
Patriarchy: Political Authority from Luther to Pufendorf,”
Ethics
103(3): 551–69.
–––, 1990, “Introductory Essay,” in
Samuel Pufendorf’s “On the Natural State of
Men.” The 1678 Latin Edition and English Translation
, M. J.
Seidler (ed. and trans.), Lewiston, ME, Mellen, pp. 1–69.
Sève, R., 1989,
Leibniz et l’ecole moderne du
droit naturel
, Paris, Presses Universitaires de France.
Silvestrini, G., 2010, “Rousseau, Pufendorf and the
Eighteenth-Century Natural Law Tradition,”
History of
European Ideas
36(3): 280–301.
Simmonds, N. E., 2002, “Grotius and Pufendorf,” in
A Companion to Early Modern Philosophy
, S. Nadler (ed.),
Malden, MA, Blackwell, pp. 210–23.
Simmons, J. A., 2006, “Theories of the State,” in
The Cambridge Companion to Early Modern Philosophy
, D.
Rutherford (ed.), New York, Cambridge U. Pr., pp. 250–73.
Skinner, A. S., 1995, “Pufendorf, Hutcheson and Adam Smith:
Some Principles of Political Economy,”
Scottish Journal of
Political Economy
42(2): 165–82.
Skinner, Q., 2002, “From the State of Princes to the Person
of the State,” in
Visions of Politics
, 3 vols., Q.
Skinner (ed.), Cambridge, Cambridge U. Pr., Volume 2, Ch. 13, pp.
368–413.
–––, 1989, “The State,” in
Political Innovation and Conceptual Change
, T. Ball, J. Farr,
and R. Hanson (eds.), New York, Cambridge U. Pr., pp.
90–131.
Sommerville, J. P., 2001, “Selden, Grotius, and the
Seventeenth-Century Intellectual Revolution in Moral and Political
Theory,” in
Rhetoric and Law in Early Modern Europe
, V.
Kahn and L. Hutson (eds.), New Haven, Yale U. Pr., pp.
318–44.
Sparn, W., 1976,
Wiederkehr der Metaphysik. Die ontologische
Frage in der lutherischen Theologie des frühen 17.
Jahrhunderts
, Stuttgart, Calwer.
Spitz, J. F., 1986, “The Concept of a State of Nature in
Locke and Pufendorf – Remarks on the Relationship between
Epistemology and Moral Philosophy in the 17th Century,”
Archives de Philosophie
49(3): 437–52.
Sprenger, G., 1996, “Der Einfluß der
Naturwissenschaften auf das Denken Samuel Pufendorfs,” in Geyer,
Goerlich, and Schliebe (eds.), pp. 165–93.
Sreedhar, S., 2014, “Pufendorf on Patriarchy,”
History of Philosophy Quarterly
31(3): 209–28.
Stonebraker, J. and S. Irving, 2015, “Natural Law and
Protestantism: A Historical Reassessment and its Contemporary
Significance,”
Oxford Journal of Law and Religion
4:
421–41.
Streidl, P., 2000,
Naturrecht, Staatswissenschaften und
Politisierung bei Gottfried Achenwall (1719–1772). Studien zur
Gelehrtengeschichte Göttingens in der Aufklärung
, Ph.D.
Dissertation, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München.
Tambakaki, P., 2009, “Review Essay: Cosmopolitanism or
agonism? Alternative visions of world order,”
Critical
Review of International Social and Political Philosophy
12 (1):
101–16.
Tamm, D., 1986, “Pufendorf und Dänemark,” in
Modéer (ed.), pp. 81–89.
Thompson, M., 1987, “Significant Silences in Locke’s
Two Treatises of Government: Constitutional History, Contract and
Law,”
The Historical Journal
31(2): 275–94.
Tierney, B., 2014,
Liberty and Law. The Idea of Permissive
Natural Law 1100–1800
, Washington, DC, Catholic U. of
America Pr.
–––, 1997,
The Idea of Natural Rights:
Studies on Natural Rights, Natural Law and Church Law
, Atlanta,
Scholars Press.
Todescan, F., 1983–2001,
Le radici teologiche del
giusnaturalismo laico
, 3 vols., Volume 3 (2001):
Il problema
della secolarizzazione nel pensiero giuridico di Samuel
Pufendorf
, Milano, Giuffrè.
Toyoda, T., 2011,
Theory and Politics of the Law of Nations.
Political Bias in International Law Discourse of Seven German Court
Councilors in the Seventeenth and Eighteenth Centuries
, Boston,
Nijhoff.
Treitschke, H. von, 1897, “Samuel Pufendorf,” in
Historische und politische Aufsätze
, Leipzig, Hirzel,
pp. 202–303.
Tuck, R., 2013, “Grotius, Hobbes, and Pufendorf on
Humanitarian Intervention,” in
Just and Unjust Military
Intervention: European Thinkers from Vitoria to Mill
, S. Recchia
(ed.), Cambridge, Cambridge U. Pr., pp. 96–112.
–––, 1999,
The Rights of War and Peace.
Political Thought and the International Order from Grotius to
Kant
, New York, Oxford U. Pr.
–––, 1993,
Philosophy and Government
1572–1651
, Cambridge, Cambridge U. Pr.
–––, 1987, “The ‘Modern’
Theory of Natural Law,” in
The Languages of Political Theory
in Early-Modern Europe
, A. Pagden (ed.), New York, Cambridge U.
Pr., pp. 99–119.
–––, 1979,
Natural Rights Theories. Their
Origin and Development
, New York, Cambridge U. Pr.
Tully, J., 1991, “Editor’s Introduction,” in
On the Duty of Man and Citizen
, M. Silverthorne (trans.), J.
Tully and M. Silverthorne (eds.), New York, Cambridge U. Pr., pp.
xiv–xl.
Valera, G., 1986, “Statistik, Staatengeschichte, Geschichte
im 18 Jahrhundert,” in
Aufklärung und Geschichte.
Studien zur deutschen Geschichtswissenschaft im 18. Jahrhundert
,
H.-E. Bödeker, G. G. Iggers, J. B. Knudsen, and P. Reill (eds.),
Göttingen, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 119–143.
VanDrunen, D., 2010,
Natural Law and the Two Kingdoms
(Series:
Emory University Studies in Law and Religion
), Grand
Rapids MI, William B. Eerdmans.
Vierhaus, R., 1987, “Die Universität Göttingen und
die Anfänge der modernen Geschichtswissenschaft im 18.
Jahrhundert,” in
Geschichtswissenschaft in Göttingen.
Eine Vorlesungsreihe
, H. Boockmann and H. Wellenreuther (eds.),
Göttingen, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, pp. 9–29.
Vogel, U., 1991, “Political Philosophers and the Trouble
with Polygamy: Patriarchal Reasoning in Modern Natural Law,”
History of Political Thought
12(2): 229–51.
Welzel, H., 1990,
Naturrecht und materiale Gerechtigkeit
,
4th ed., Göttingen, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
–––, 1958,
Die Naturrechtslehre Samuel
Pufendorfs
, Berlin, Gruyter.
–––, 1952, “Ein Kapitel aus der Geschichte
der amerikanischen Erklärung der Menschenrechte (S. Wise und S.
Pufendorf),” in
Rechtsprobleme in Staat und Kirche.
Festschrift für Rudolf Smend zum 70. Geburtstag
,
Göttingen, Schwartz, pp. 387–441.
Wenzel, D., 1992,
Le problème du droit naturel dans
l’Empire au 17ème siècle. Pufendorf, Thomasius et
leurs adversaires
, Tours.
Westerman, P. C., 1998,
The Disintegration of Natural Law
Theory. Aquinas to Finnis
, Leiden, Brill.
White, M., 1978,
The Philosophy of the American
Revolution
, New York, Oxford U. Pr.
Wieacker, F., 1996,
A History of Private Law in Europe, with
Particular Reference to Germany
, T. Weir (trans.), New York,
Oxford U. Pr., pp. 213–256.
Wight, M., 1977, “De systematibus civitatum,” in
Systems of States
, H. Bull (ed.), Leicester, Leicester U.
Pr., pp. 21–45.
Wilson, P. H., 2006, “Still a Monstrosity? Some Reflections
on Early Modern German Statehood,”
The Historical
Journal
49(1), pp. 565–76.
Witte, Jr., J., 2008,
The Reformation of Rights: Law, Religion
and Human Rights in Early Modern Calvinism
(Series:
Emory
University Studies in Law and Religion
), New York, Cambridge U.
Pr.
Wokler, R., 1994, “Rousseau’s Pufendorf: Natural Law
and the Foundations of Commercial Society,”
History of
Political Thought
15(3): 373–402.
Wolf, E., 1927,
Grotius, Pufendorf, Thomasius. Drei Kapitel
zur Gestaltgeschichte der Rechtswissenschaft
, Tübingen, Mohr
Siebeck.
Wolfrum, R., 2013, “Samuel Pufendorfs Blick auf die EU. Eine
Hypothese,” in
Heidelberger Thesen zu Recht &
Gerechtigkeit
, C. Baldus, H. Kronke, and U. Mager (eds.),
Tübingen, Mohr Siebeck, pp. 27–38.
Young, J. T., 2008, “Law and Economics in the Protestant
Natural Law Tradition: Samuel Pufendorf, Francis Hutcheson, and Adam
Smith,”
Journal of the History of Economic Thought
30(3): 283–296.
Zagorin, P., 2000, “Hobbes Without Grotius,”
History of Political Thought
21(1): 16–40.
Zande, Johan van der, 2010, “Statistik and History in the
German Enlightenment,”
Journal of the History of Ideas
71(3): 411–432.
Zurbuchen, S., 2013, “Religious Commitment and Secular
Reason: Pufendorf on the Separation between Religion and
Politics,” in Parkin and Stanton (eds.), pp. 1–14.
–––, 2009, “Samuel Pufendorfs Theorie der
Staatsformen und ihre Bedeutung für die Theorie der modernen
Republik,” in Hüning (ed.), pp. 138–160.
–––, 2007, “Zur Entwicklung von der
Toleranz zur Religionsfreiheit im historischen Kontext
Brandenburg-Preußens am Beispiel von Pufendorf und
Mendelssohn,” in
Berliner Aufklärung.
Kultur-wissenschaftliche Studien
, Band 3, U. Goldenbaum and A.
Kosenina (eds.), Hannover, Wehrhahn, pp. 7–32.
–––, 1999, “From Denominationalism to
Enlightenment: Pufendorf, Leclerc, and Thomasius on Toleration,”
in
Religious Toleration. ‘The Variety of Rites’ From
Cyrus to Defoe
, J. C. Laursen (ed.), New York, St. Martin’s
Pr., pp. 191–209.
–––, 1996, “Samuel Pufendorf’s
Concept of Toleration,” in
Difference and Dissent. Theories
of Toleration in Medieval and Early Modern Europe
, C. J. Nederman
and J. C. Laursen (eds.), New York, Rowman & Littlefield,
163–84.
–––, 1991,
Naturrecht und natürliche
Religion. Zur Geschichte des Toleranzproblems von Samuel Pufendorf bis
Jean-Jacques Rousseau
, Würzburg, Königshausen &
Neumann.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Portrait of Samuel Pufendorf
.
NDB | ADB Deutsche Biographie
.
Zedler:
Universal-Lexicon
,
 vol. 29, pp. 606–608.
Michaud:
Biographie Universelle
,
 vol. 34, pp. 502–505.
Samuel von Pufendorf
,
 Wikipedia entry.
Gallica
,
 text archive of the Bibliothèque Nationale de France.
Zentrales Verzeichnis Digitalisierter Drucke (ZVDD)
,
 comprehensive directory of digitized sources in Germany since the
15th century.
Natural Law 1625–1850: Database
,
 an open-ended, collaborative biographical and bibliographical
knowledge reservoir of early modern natural law.
Natural Law and Enlightenment Series (Online Library of Liberty)
,
 newly edited reprints of early modern natural law works in English
translation.
Related Entries
Bodin, Jean
|
contractarianism
|
cosmopolitanism
|
ethics: natural law tradition
|
German Philosophy: in the 18th century, prior to Kant
|
Grotius, Hugo
|
Hobbes, Thomas
|
Hobbes, Thomas: moral and political philosophy
|
legal obligation and authority
|
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm: ethics
|
Locke, John: political philosophy
|
nature of law
|
political philosophy: medieval
|
Scottish Philosophy: in the 18th Century
|
sovereignty
|
voluntarism, theological
|
Wolff, Christian