Scientific Discovery
First published Thu Mar 6, 2014; substantive revision Mon Oct 31, 2022
Scientific discovery is the process or product of successful
scientific inquiry. Objects of discovery can be things, events,
processes, causes, and properties as well as theories and hypotheses
and their features (their explanatory power, for example). Most
philosophical discussions of scientific discoveries focus on the
generation of new hypotheses that fit or explain given data sets or
allow for the derivation of testable consequences. Philosophical
discussions of scientific discovery have been intricate and complex
because the term “discovery” has been used in many
different ways, both to refer to the outcome and to the procedure of
inquiry. In the narrowest sense, the term “discovery”
refers to the purported “eureka moment” of having a new
insight. In the broadest sense, “discovery” is a synonym
for “successful scientific endeavor” tout court. Some
philosophical disputes about the nature of scientific discovery
reflect these terminological variations.
Philosophical issues related to scientific discovery arise about the
nature of human creativity, specifically about whether the
“eureka moment” can be analyzed and about whether there
are rules (algorithms, guidelines, or heuristics) according to which
such a novel insight can be brought about. Philosophical issues also
arise about the analysis and evaluation of heuristics, about the
characteristics of hypotheses worthy of articulation and testing, and,
on the meta-level, about the nature and scope of philosophical
analysis itself. This essay describes the emergence and development of
the philosophical problem of scientific discovery and surveys
different philosophical approaches to understanding scientific
discovery. In doing so, it also illuminates the meta-philosophical
problems surrounding the debates, and, incidentally, the changing
nature of philosophy of science.
1. Introduction
2. Scientific inquiry as discovery
3. Elements of discovery
4. Pragmatic logics of discovery
5. The distinction between the context of discovery and the context of justification
6. Logics of discovery after the context distinction
6.1 Discovery as abduction
6.2 Heuristic programming
7. Anomalies and the structure of discovery
8. Methodologies of discovery
8.1 Discoverability
8.2 Preliminary appraisal
8.3 Heuristic strategies
9. Cognitive perspectives on discovery
9.1 Kinds and features of creativity
9.2 Analogy
9.3 Mental models
10. Machine discovery
11. Social epistemology and discovery
12. Integrated approaches to knowledge generation
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Introduction
Philosophical reflection on scientific discovery occurred in different
phases. Prior to the 1930s, philosophers were mostly concerned with
discoveries in the broad sense of the term, that is, with the analysis
of successful scientific inquiry as a whole. Philosophical discussions
focused on the question of whether there were any discernible patterns
in the production of new knowledge. Because the concept of discovery
did not have a specified meaning and was used in a very wide sense,
almost all discussions of scientific method and practice could
potentially be considered as early contributions to reflections on
scientific discovery. In the course of the 18
th
century, as
philosophy of science and science gradually became two distinct
endeavors with different audiences, the term “discovery”
became a technical term in philosophical discussions. Different
elements of scientific inquiry were specified. Most importantly,
during the 19
th
century, the generation of new knowledge
came to be clearly and explicitly distinguished from its assessment,
and thus the conditions for the narrower notion of discovery as the
act or process of conceiving new ideas emerged. This distinction was
encapsulated in the so-called “context distinction,”
between the “context of discovery” and the “context
of justification”.
Much of the discussion about scientific discovery in the
20
th
century revolved around this distinction It was argued
that conceiving a new idea is a non-rational process, a leap of
insight that cannot be captured in specific instructions.
Justification, by contrast, is a systematic process of applying
evaluative criteria to knowledge claims. Advocates of the context
distinction argued that philosophy of science is exclusively concerned
with the context of justification. The assumption underlying this
argument is that philosophy is a normative project; it determines
norms for scientific practice. Given this assumption, only the
justification of ideas, not their generation, can be the subject of
philosophical (normative) analysis. Discovery, by contrast, can only
be a topic for empirical study. By definition, the study of discovery
is outside the scope of philosophy of science proper.
The introduction of the context distinction and the disciplinary
distinction between empirical science studies and normative philosophy
of science that was tied to it spawned meta-philosophical disputes.
For a long time, philosophical debates about discovery were shaped by
the notion that philosophical and empirical analyses are mutually
exclusive. Some philosophers insisted, like their predecessors prior
to the 1930s, that the philosopher’s tasks include the analysis
of actual scientific practices and that scientific resources be used
to address philosophical problems. They maintained that it is a
legitimate task for philosophy of science to develop a theory of
heuristics or problem solving. But this position was the minority view
in philosophy of science until the last decades of the 20
th
century. Philosophers of discovery were thus compelled to demonstrate
that scientific discovery was in fact a legitimate part of philosophy
of science. Philosophical reflections about the nature of scientific
discovery had to be bolstered by meta-philosophical arguments about
the nature and scope of philosophy of science.
Today, however, there is wide agreement that philosophy and empirical
research are not mutually exclusive. Not only do empirical studies of
actual scientific discoveries in past and present inform philosophical
thought about the structure and cognitive mechanisms of discovery, but
works in psychology, cognitive science, artificial intelligence and
related fields have become integral parts of philosophical analyses of
the processes and conditions of the generation of new knowledge.
Social epistemology has opened up another perspective on scientific
discovery, reconceptualizing knowledge generation as group
process.
2. Scientific inquiry as discovery
Prior to the 19
th
century, the term “discovery”
was used broadly to refer to a new finding, such as a new cure, an
unknown territory, an improvement of an instrument, or a new method of
measuring longitude. One strand of the discussion about discovery
dating back to ancient times concerns the method of analysis as the
method of discovery in mathematics and geometry, and, by extension, in
philosophy and scientific inquiry. Following the analytic method, we
seek to find or discover something – the “thing
sought,” which could be a theorem, a solution to a geometrical
problem, or a cause – by analyzing it. In the ancient Greek
context, analytic methods in mathematics, geometry, and philosophy
were not clearly separated; the notion of finding or discovering
things by analysis was relevant in all these fields.
In the ensuing centuries, several natural and experimental
philosophers, including Avicenna and Zabarella, Bacon and Boyle, the
authors of the
Port-Royal Logic
and Newton, and many others,
expounded rules of reasoning and methods for arriving at new
knowledge. The ancient notion of analysis still informed these rules
and methods. Newton’s famous thirty-first query in the second
edition of the
Opticks
outlines the role of analysis in
discovery as follows: “As in Mathematicks, so in Natural
Philosophy, the Investigation of difficult Things by the Method of
Analysis, ought ever to precede the Method of Composition. This
Analysis consists in making Experiments and Observations, and in
drawing general Conclusions from them by Induction, and admitting of
no Objections against the Conclusions, but such as are taken from
Experiments, or other certain Truths … By this way of Analysis
we may proceed from Compounds to Ingredients, and from Motions to the
Forces producing them; and in general, from Effects to their Causes,
and from particular Causes to more general ones, till the Argument end
in the most general. This is the Method of Analysis” (Newton
1718, 380, see Koertge 1980, section VI). Early modern accounts of
discovery captured knowledge-seeking practices in the study of living
and non-living nature, ranging from astronomy and physics to medicine,
chemistry, and agriculture. These rich accounts of scientific inquiry
were often expounded to bolster particular theories about the nature
of matter and natural forces and were not explicitly labeled
“methods of
discovery
”, yet they are, in fact,
accounts of knowledge generation and proper scientific reasoning,
covering topics such as the role of the senses in knowledge
generation, observation and experimentation, analysis and synthesis,
induction and deduction, hypotheses, probability, and certainty.
Bacon’s work is a prominent example. His view of the method of
science as it is presented in the
Novum Organum
showed how
best to arrive at knowledge about “form natures” (the most
general properties of matter) via a systematic investigation of
phenomenal natures. Bacon described how first to collect and organize
natural phenomena and experimentally produced facts in tables, how to
evaluate these lists, and how to refine the initial results with the
help of further trials. Through these steps, the investigator would
arrive at conclusions about the “form nature” that
produces particular phenomenal natures. Bacon expounded the procedures
of constructing and evaluating tables of presences and absences to
underpin his matter theory. In addition, in his other writings, such
as his natural history
Sylva Sylvarum
or his comprehensive
work on human learning
De Augmentis Scientiarium
, Bacon
exemplified the “art of discovery” with practical examples
and discussions of strategies of inquiry.
Like Bacon and Newton, several other early modern authors advanced
ideas about how to generate and secure empirical knowledge, what
difficulties may arise in scientific inquiry, and how they could be
overcome. The close connection between theories about matter and force
and scientific methodologies that we find in early modern works was
gradually severed. 18
th
- and early 19
th
-century
authors on scientific method and logic cited early modern approaches
mostly to model proper scientific practice and reasoning, often
creatively modifying them
 (
section 3
).
 Moreover, they developed the earlier methodologies of
experimentation, observation, and reasoning into practical guidelines
for discovering new phenomena and devising probable hypotheses about
cause-effect relations.
It was common in 20
th
-century philosophy of science to draw
a sharp contrast between those early theories of scientific method and
modern approaches. 20
th
-century philosophers of science
interpreted 17
th
- and 18
th
-century approaches as
generative theories of scientific method. They function simultaneously
as guides for acquiring new knowledge and as assessments of the
knowledge thus obtained, whereby knowledge that is obtained “in
the right way” is considered secure (Laudan 1980; Schaffner
1993: chapter 2). On this view, scientific methods are taken to have
probative force (Nickles 1985). According to modern,
“consequentialist” theories, propositions must be
established by comparing their consequences with observed and
experimentally produced phenomena (Laudan 1980; Nickles 1985). It was
further argued that, when consequentialist theories were on the rise,
the two processes of generation and assessment of an idea or
hypothesis became distinct, and the view that the merit of a new idea
does not depend on the way in which it was arrived at became widely
accepted.
More recent research in history of philosophy of science has shown,
however, that there was no such sharp contrast. Consequentialist ideas
were advanced throughout the 18
th
century, and the early
modern generative theories of scientific method and knowledge were
more pragmatic than previously assumed. Early modern scholars did not
assume that this procedure would lead to absolute certainty. One could
only obtain moral certainty for the propositions thus secured.
3. Elements of discovery
During the 18
th
and 19
th
centuries, the
different elements of discovery gradually became separated and
discussed in more detail. Discussions concerned the nature of
observations and experiments, the act of having an insight and the
processes of articulating, developing, and testing the novel insight.
Philosophical discussion focused on the question of whether and to
what extent rules could be devised to guide each of these
processes.
Numerous 19
th
-century scholars contributed to these
discussions, including Claude Bernard, Auguste Comte, George Gore,
John Herschel, W. Stanley Jevons, Justus von Liebig, John Stuart Mill,
and Charles Sanders Peirce, to name only a few. William
Whewell’s work, especially the two volumes of
Philosophy of
the Inductive Sciences
of 1840, is a noteworthy and, later, much
discussed contribution to the philosophical debates about scientific
discovery because he explicitly distinguished the creative moment or
“happy thought” as he called it from other elements of
scientific inquiry and because he offered a detailed analysis of the
“discoverer’s induction”, i.e., the pursuit and
evaluation of the new insight. Whewell’s approach is not unique,
but for late 20
th
-century philosophers of science, his
comprehensive, historically informed philosophy of discovery became a
point of orientation in the revival of interest in scientific
discovery processes.
For Whewell, discovery comprised three elements: the happy thought,
the articulation and development of that thought, and the testing or
verification of it. His account was in part a description of the
psychological makeup of the discoverer. For instance, he held that
only geniuses could have those happy thoughts that are essential to
discovery. In part, his account was an account of the methods by which
happy thoughts are integrated into the system of knowledge. According
to Whewell, the initial step in every discovery is what he called
“some happy thought, of which we cannot trace the origin; some
fortunate cast of intellect, rising above all rules. No maxims can be
given which inevitably lead to discovery” (Whewell 1996 [1840]:
186). An “art of discovery” in the sense of a teachable
and learnable skill does not exist according to Whewell. The happy
thought builds on the known facts, but according to Whewell it is
impossible to prescribe a method for having happy thoughts.
In this sense, happy thoughts are accidental. But in an important
sense, scientific discoveries are
not
accidental. The happy
thought is not a wild guess. Only the person whose mind is prepared to
see things will actually notice them. The “previous condition of
the intellect, and not the single fact, is really the main and
peculiar cause of the success. The fact is merely the occasion by
which the engine of discovery is brought into play sooner or later. It
is, as I have elsewhere said, only the spark which discharges a gun
already loaded and pointed; and there is little propriety in speaking
of such an accident as the cause why the bullet hits its mark.”
(Whewell 1996 [1840]: 189).
Having a happy thought is not yet a discovery, however. The second
element of a scientific discovery consists in binding
together—“colligating”, as Whewell called it—a
set of facts by bringing them under a general conception. Not only
does the colligation produce something new, but it also shows the
previously known facts in a new light. Colligation involves, on the
one hand, the specification of facts through systematic observation,
measurements and experiment, and on the other hand, the clarification
of ideas through the exposition of the definitions and axioms that are
tacitly implied in those ideas. This process is extended and
iterative. The scientists go back and forth between binding together
the facts, clarifying the idea, rendering the facts more exact, and so
forth.
The final part of the discovery is the verification of the colligation
involving the happy thought. This means, first and foremost, that the
outcome of the colligation must be sufficient to explain the data at
hand. Verification also involves judging the predictive power,
simplicity, and “consilience” of the outcome of the
colligation. “Consilience” refers to a higher range of
generality (broader applicability) of the theory (the articulated and
clarified happy thought) that the actual colligation produced.
Whewell’s account of discovery is not a deductivist system. It
is essential that the outcome of the colligation be inferable from the
data prior to any testing (Snyder 1997).
Whewell’s theory of discovery clearly separates three elements:
the non-analyzable happy thought or eureka moment; the process of
colligation which includes the clarification and explication of facts
and ideas; and the verification of the outcome of the colligation. His
position that the philosophy of discovery cannot prescribe how to
think happy thoughts has been a key element of 20
th
-century
philosophical reflection on discovery. In contrast to many
20
th
-century approaches, Whewell’s philosophical
conception of discovery also comprises the processes by which the
happy thoughts are articulated. Similarly, the process of verification
is an integral part of discovery. The procedures of articulation and
test are
both
analyzable according to Whewell, and his
conception of colligation and verification serve as guidelines for how
the discoverer should proceed. To verify a hypothesis, the
investigator needs to show that it accounts for the known facts, that
it foretells new, previously unobserved phenomena, and that it can
explain and predict phenomena which are explained and predicted by a
hypothesis that was obtained through an independent happy
thought-cum-colligation (Ducasse 1951).
Whewell’s conceptualization of scientific discovery offers a
useful framework for mapping the philosophical debates about discovery
and for identifying major issues of concern in 20
th
-century
philosophical debates. Until the late 20
th
century, most
philosophers operated with a notion of discovery that is narrower than
Whewell’s. In more recent treatments of discovery, however, the
scope of the term “discovery” is limited to either the
first of these elements, the “happy thought”, or to the
happy thought and its initial articulation. In the narrower
conception, what Whewell called “verification” is not part
of discovery proper. Secondly, until the late 20
th
century,
there was wide agreement that the eureka moment, narrowly construed,
is an unanalyzable, even mysterious leap of insight. The main
disagreements concerned the question of whether the process of
developing a hypothesis (the “colligation” in
Whewell’s terms) is, or is not, a part of discovery proper
– and if it is, whether and how this process is guided by rules.
Much of the controversies in the 20
th
century about the
possibility of a philosophy of discovery can be understood against the
background of the disagreement about whether the process of discovery
does or does not include the articulation and development of a novel
thought. Philosophers also disagreed on the issue of whether it is a
philosophical task to explicate these rules.
In early 20
th
-century logical empiricism, the view that
discovery is or at least crucially involves a non-analyzable creative
act of a gifted genius was widespread. Alternative conceptions of
discovery especially in the pragmatist tradition emphasize that
discovery is an extended process, i.e., that the discovery process
includes the reasoning processes through which a new insight is
articulated and further developed.
4. Pragmatic logics of discovery
In the pragmatist tradition, the term “logic” is used in
the broad sense to refer to strategies of human reasoning and inquiry.
While the reasoning involved does not proceed according to the
principles of demonstrative logic, it is systematic enough to deserve
the label “logical”. Proponents of this view argued that
traditional (here: syllogistic) logic is an inadequate model of
scientific discovery because it misrepresents the process of knowledge
generation as grossly as the notion of an “aha
moment”.
Early 20
th
-century pragmatic logics of discovery can best
be described as comprehensive theories of the mental and
physical-practical operations involved in knowledge generation, as
theories of “how we think” (Dewey 1910). Among the mental
operations are classification, determination of what is relevant to an
inquiry, and the conditions of communication of meaning; among the
physical operations are observation and (laboratory) experiments.
These features of scientific discovery are either not or only
insufficiently represented by traditional syllogistic logic (Schiller
1917: 236–7).
Philosophers advocating this approach agree that the logic of
discovery should be characterized as a set of heuristic principles
rather than as a process of applying inductive or deductive logic to a
set of propositions. These heuristic principles are not understood to
show the path to secure knowledge. Heuristic principles are suggestive
rather than demonstrative (Carmichael 1922, 1930). One recurrent
feature in these accounts of the reasoning strategies leading to new
ideas is analogical reasoning (Schiller 1917; Benjamin 1934, see also
section 9.2
.).
 However, in academic philosophy of science, endeavors to develop more
systematically the heuristics guiding discovery processes were soon
eclipsed by the advance of the distinction between contexts of
discovery and justification.
5. The distinction between the context of discovery and the context of justification
The distinction between “context of discovery” and
“context of justification” dominated and shaped the
discussions about discovery in 20
th
-century philosophy of
science. The context distinction marks the distinction between the
generation of a new idea or hypothesis and the defense (test,
verification) of it. As the previous sections have shown, the
distinction among different elements of scientific inquiry has a long
history but in the first half of the 20
th
century, the
distinction between the different features of scientific inquiry
turned into a powerful demarcation criterion between
“genuine” philosophy and other fields of science studies,
which became potent in philosophy of science. The boundary between
context of discovery (the
de facto
thinking processes) and
context of justification (the
de jure
defense of the
correctness of these thoughts) was now understood to determine the
scope of philosophy of science, whereby philosophy of science is
conceived as a normative endeavor. Advocates of the context
distinction argue that the generation of a new idea is an intuitive,
nonrational process; it cannot be subject to normative analysis.
Therefore, the study of scientists’ actual thinking can only be
the subject of psychology, sociology, and other empirical sciences.
Philosophy of science, by contrast, is exclusively concerned with the
context of justification.
The terms “context of discovery” and “context of
justification” are often associated with Hans
Reichenbach’s work. Reichenbach’s original conception of
the context distinction is quite complex, however (Howard 2006;
Richardson 2006). It does not map easily on to the disciplinary
distinction mentioned above, because for Reichenbach, philosophy of
science proper is partly descriptive. Reichenbach maintains that
philosophy of science includes a description of knowledge as it really
is. Descriptive philosophy of science reconstructs scientists’
thinking processes in such a way that logical analysis can be
performed on them, and it thus prepares the ground for the evaluation
of these thoughts (Reichenbach 1938: § 1). Discovery, by
contrast, is the object of empirical—psychological,
sociological—study. According to Reichenbach, the empirical
study of discoveries shows that processes of discovery often
correspond to the principle of induction, but this is simply a
psychological fact (Reichenbach 1938: 403).
While the terms “context of discovery” and “context
of justification” are widely used, there has been ample
discussion about how the distinction should be drawn and what their
philosophical significance is (c.f. Kordig 1978; Gutting 1980; Zahar
1983; Leplin 1987; Hoyningen-Huene 1987; Weber 2005: chapter 3;
Schickore and Steinle 2006). Most commonly, the distinction is
interpreted as a distinction between the process of conceiving a
theory and the assessment of that theory, specifically the assessment
of the theory’s epistemic support. This version of the
distinction is not necessarily interpreted as a temporal distinction.
In other words, it is not usually assumed that a theory is first fully
developed and then assessed. Rather, generation and assessment are two
different epistemic approaches to theory: the endeavor to articulate,
flesh out, and develop its potential and the endeavor to assess its
epistemic worth. Within the framework of the context distinction,
there are two main ways of conceptualizing the process of conceiving a
theory. The first option is to characterize the generation of new
knowledge as an irrational act, a mysterious creative intuition, a
“eureka moment”. The second option is to conceptualize the
generation of new knowledge as an extended process that
includes
a creative act as well as some process of
articulating and developing the creative idea.
Both of these accounts of knowledge generation served as starting
points for arguments against the possibility of a philosophy of
discovery. In line with the first option, philosophers have argued
that neither is it possible to prescribe a logical method that
produces new ideas nor is it possible to reconstruct logically the
process of discovery. Only the process of testing is amenable to
logical investigation. This objection to philosophies of discovery has
been called the “discovery machine objection” (Curd 1980:
207). It is usually associated with Karl Popper’s
Logic of
Scientific Discovery
.
The initial state, the act of conceiving or inventing a theory, seems
to me neither to call for logical analysis not to be susceptible of
it. The question how it happens that a new idea occurs to a
man—whether it is a musical theme, a dramatic conflict, or a
scientific theory—may be of great interest to empirical
psychology; but it is irrelevant to the logical analysis of scientific
knowledge. This latter is concerned not with
questions of
fact
(Kant’s
quid facti
?)
,
but only with
questions of
justification or validity
(Kant’s
quid
juris
?)
.
Its questions are of the following kind. Can a
statement be justified? And if so, how? Is it testable? Is it
logically dependent on certain other statements? Or does it perhaps
contradict them? […]Accordingly I shall distinguish sharply
between the process of conceiving a new idea, and the methods and
results of examining it logically. As to the task of the logic of
knowledge—in contradistinction to the psychology of
knowledge—I shall proceed on the assumption that it consists
solely in investigating the methods employed in those systematic tests
to which every new idea must be subjected if it is to be seriously
entertained. (Popper 2002 [1934/1959]: 7–8)
With respect to the second way of conceptualizing knowledge
generation, many philosophers argue in a similar fashion that because
the process of discovery involves an irrational, intuitive process,
which cannot be examined logically, a logic of discovery cannot be
construed. Other philosophers turn against the philosophy of discovery
even though they explicitly acknowledge that discovery is an extended,
reasoned process. They present a meta-philosophical objection
argument, arguing that a theory of articulating and developing ideas
is not a philosophical but a psychological or sociological theory. In
this perspective, “discovery” is understood as a
retrospective label, which is attributed as a sign of accomplishment
to some scientific endeavors. Sociological theories acknowledge that
discovery is a collective achievement and the outcome of a process of
negotiation through which “discovery stories” are
constructed and certain knowledge claims are granted discovery status
(Brannigan 1981; Schaffer 1986, 1994).
The impact of the context distinction on 20
th
-century
studies of scientific discovery and on philosophy of science more
generally can hardly be overestimated. The view that the process of
discovery (however construed) is outside the scope of philosophy of
science proper was widely shared amongst philosophers of science for
most of the 20
th
century. The last section shows that there
were some attempts to develop logics of discovery in the 1920s and
1930s, especially in the pragmatist tradition. But for several
decades, the context distinction dictated what philosophy of science
should be about and how it should proceed. The dominant view was that
theories of mental operations or heuristics had no place in philosophy
of science and that, therefore, discovery was not a legitimate topic
for philosophy of science. Until the last decades of the
20
th
century, there were few attempts to challenge the
disciplinary distinction tied to the context distinction. Only during
the 1970s did the interest in philosophical approaches to discovery
begin to increase again. But the context distinction remained a
challenge for philosophies of discovery.
There are several lines of response to the disciplinary distinction
tied to the context distinction. Each of these lines of response opens
a philosophical perspective on discovery. Each proceeds on the
assumption that philosophy of science may legitimately include some
form of analysis of
actual
reasoning patterns as well as
information from empirical sciences such as cognitive science,
psychology, and sociology. All of these responses reject the idea that
discovery is nothing but a mystical event. Discovery is conceived as
an analyzable reasoning process, not just as a creative leap by which
novel ideas spring into being fully formed. All of these responses
agree that the procedures and methods for arriving at new hypotheses
and ideas are no guarantee that the hypothesis or idea that is thus
formed is necessarily the best or the correct one. Nonetheless, it is
the task of philosophy of science to provide rules for making this
process better. All of these responses can be described as theories of
problem solving, whose ultimate goal is to make the generation of new
ideas and theories more efficient.
But the different approaches to scientific discovery employ different
terminologies. In particular, the term “logic” of
discovery is sometimes used in a narrow sense and sometimes broadly
understood. In the narrow sense, “logic” of discovery is
understood to refer to a set of formal, generally applicable rules by
which novel ideas can be mechanically derived from existing data. In
the broad sense, “logic” of discovery refers to the
schematic representation of reasoning procedures.
“Logical” is just another term for “rational”.
Moreover, while each of these responses combines philosophical
analyses of scientific discovery with empirical research on actual
human cognition, different sets of resources are mobilized, ranging
from AI research and cognitive science to historical studies of
problem-solving procedures. Also, the responses parse the process of
scientific inquiry differently. Often, scientific inquiry is regarded
as having two aspects, viz. generation and assessments of new ideas.
At times, however, scientific inquiry is regarded as having three
aspects, namely generation, pursuit or articulation, and assessment of
knowledge. In the latter framework, the label “discovery”
is sometimes used to refer just to generation and sometimes to refer
to both generation and pursuit.
One response to the challenge of the context distinction draws on a
broad understanding of the term “logic” to argue that we
cannot but admit a general, domain-neutral logic if we do not want to
assume that the success of science is a miracle (Jantzen 2016) and
that a logic of scientific discovery can be developed
 (
section 6
).
 Another response, drawing on a narrow understanding of the term
“logic”, is to concede that there is no
logic
of
discovery, i.e., no algorithm for generating new knowledge, but that
the process of discovery follows an identifiable, analyzable pattern
 (
section 7
).
Others argue that discovery is governed by a
methodology
. The
methodology of discovery is a legitimate topic for philosophical
analysis
 (
section 8
).
 Yet another response assumes that discovery is or at least involves a
creative act. Drawing on resources from cognitive science,
neuroscience, computational research, and environmental and social
psychology, philosophers have sought to demystify the cognitive
processes involved in the generation of new ideas. Philosophers who
take this approach argue that scientific creativity is amenable to
philosophical analysis
 (
section 9.1
).
All these responses assume that there is more to discovery than a
eureka moment. Discovery comprises processes of articulating,
developing, and assessing the creative thought, as well as the
scientific community’s adjudication of what does, and does not,
count as “discovery” (Arabatzis 1996). These are the
processes that can be examined with the tools of philosophical
analysis, augmented by input from other fields of science studies such
as sociology, history, or cognitive science.
6. Logics of discovery after the context distinction
One way of responding to the demarcation criterion described above is
to argue that discovery is a topic for philosophy of science because
it is a logical process after all. Advocates of this approach to the
logic of discovery usually accept the overall distinction between the
two processes of conceiving and testing a hypothesis. They also agree
that it is impossible to put together a manual that provides a formal,
mechanical procedure through which innovative concepts or hypotheses
can be derived: There is no discovery machine. But they reject the
view that the process of conceiving a theory is a creative act, a
mysterious guess, a hunch, a more or less instantaneous and random
process. Instead, they insist that both conceiving and testing
hypotheses are processes of reasoning and systematic inference, that
both of these processes can be represented schematically, and that it
is possible to distinguish better and worse paths to new
knowledge.
This line of argument has much in common with the logics of discovery
described in
section 4
above but it is now explicitly pitched against the disciplinary
distinction tied to the context distinction. There are two main ways
of developing this argument. The first is to conceive of discovery in
terms of abductive reasoning
 (
section 6.1
).
 The second is to conceive of discovery in terms of problem-solving
algorithms, whereby heuristic rules aid the processing of available
data and enhance the success in finding solutions to problems
 (
section 6.2
).
 Both lines of argument rely on a broad conception of logic, whereby
the “logic” of discovery amounts to a schematic account of
the reasoning processes involved in knowledge generation.
6.1 Discovery as abduction
One argument, elaborated prominently by Norwood R. Hanson, is that the
act of discovery—here, the act of suggesting a new
hypothesis—follows a distinctive logical pattern, which is
different from both inductive logic and the logic of
hypothetico-deductive reasoning. The special logic of discovery is the
logic of abductive or “retroductive” inferences (Hanson
1958). The argument that it is through an act of abductive inferences
that plausible, promising scientific hypotheses are devised goes back
to C.S. Peirce. This version of the logic of discovery characterizes
reasoning processes that take place
before
a new hypothesis
is ultimately justified. The abductive mode of reasoning that leads to
plausible hypotheses is conceptualized as an inference beginning with
data or, more specifically, with surprising or anomalous
phenomena.
In this view, discovery is primarily a process of explaining anomalies
or surprising, astonishing phenomena. The scientists’ reasoning
proceeds abductively from an anomaly to an explanatory hypothesis in
light of which the phenomena would no longer be surprising or
anomalous. The outcome of this reasoning process is not one single
specific hypothesis but the delineation of a type of hypotheses that
is worthy of further attention (Hanson 1965: 64). According to Hanson,
the abductive argument has the following schematic form (Hanson 1960:
104):
Some surprising, astonishing phenomena
p
1
,
p
2
,
p
3
… are
encountered.
But
p
1
,
p
2
,
p
3
… would not be surprising were an
hypothesis of
H
’s type to obtain. They would follow as
a matter of course from something like
H
and would be
explained by it.
Therefore there is good reason for elaborating an hypothesis of
type H—for proposing it as a possible hypothesis from whose
assumption
p
1
,
p
2
,
p
3
… might be explained.
Drawing on the historical record, Hanson argues that several important
discoveries were made relying on abductive reasoning, such as
Kepler’s discovery of the elliptic orbit of Mars (Hanson 1958).
It is now widely agreed, however, that Hanson’s reconstruction
of the episode is not a historically adequate account of
Kepler’s discovery (Lugg 1985). More importantly, while there is
general agreement that abductive inferences are frequent in both
everyday and scientific reasoning, these inferences are no longer
considered as
logical
inferences. Even if one accepts
Hanson’s schematic representation of the process of identifying
plausible hypotheses, this process is a “logical” process
only in the widest sense whereby the term “logical” is
understood as synonymous with “rational”. Notably, some
philosophers have even questioned the rationality of abductive
inferences (Koehler 1991; Brem and Rips 2000).
Another argument against the above schema is that it is too
permissive. There will be several hypotheses that are explanations for
phenomena
p
1
,
p
2
,
p
3
…, so the fact that a particular
hypothesis explains the phenomena is not a decisive criterion for
developing that hypothesis (Harman 1965; see also Blackwell 1969).
Additional criteria are required to evaluate the hypothesis yielded by
abductive inferences.
Finally, it is worth noting that the schema of abductive reasoning
does not explain the very act of conceiving a hypothesis or
hypothesis-type. The processes by which a new idea is first
articulated remain unanalyzed in the above schema. The schema focuses
on the reasoning processes by which an exploratory hypothesis is
assessed in terms of its merits and promise (Laudan 1980; Schaffner
1993).
In more recent work on abduction and discovery, two notions of
abduction are sometimes distinguished: the common notion of abduction
as inference to the best explanation (selective abduction) and
creative abduction (Magnani 2000, 2009). Selective abduction—the
inference to the best explanation—involves selecting a
hypothesis from a set of known hypotheses. Medical diagnosis
exemplifies this kind of abduction. Creative abduction, by contrast,
involves generating a new, plausible hypothesis. This happens, for
instance, in medical research, when the notion of a new disease is
articulated. However, it is still an open question whether this
distinction can be drawn, or whether there is a more gradual
transition from selecting an explanatory hypothesis from a familiar
domain (selective abduction) to selecting a hypothesis that is
slightly modified from the familiar set and to identifying a more
drastically modified or altered assumption.
Another recent suggestion is to broaden Peirce’s original
account of abduction and to include not only verbal information but
also non-verbal mental representations, such as visual, auditory, or
motor representations. In Thagard’s approach, representations
are characterized as patterns of activity in mental populations (see
also
section 9.3
below). The advantage of the neural account of human reasoning is
that it covers features such as the surprise that accompanies the
generation of new insights or the visual and auditory representations
that contribute to it. Surprise, for instance, could be characterized
as resulting from rapid changes in activation of the node in a neural
network representing the “surprising” element (Thagard and
Stewart 2011). If all mental representations can be characterized as
patterns of firing in neural populations, abduction can be analyzed as
the combination or “convolution” (Thagard) of patterns of
neural activity from disjoint or overlapping patterns of activity
(Thagard 2010).
6.2 Heuristic programming
The concern with the logic of discovery has also motivated research on
artificial intelligence at the intersection of philosophy of science
and cognitive science. In this approach, scientific discovery is
treated as a form of problem-solving activity (Simon 1973; see also
Newell and Simon 1971), whereby the systematic aspects of problem
solving are studied within an information-processing framework. The
aim is to clarify with the help of computational tools the nature of
the methods used to discover scientific hypotheses. These hypotheses
are regarded as solutions to problems. Philosophers working in this
tradition build computer programs employing methods of heuristic
selective search (e.g., Langley et al. 1987). In computational
heuristics, search programs can be described as searches for solutions
in a so-called “problem space” in a certain domain. The
problem space comprises all possible configurations in that domain
(e.g., for chess problems, all possible arrangements of pieces on a
board of chess). Each configuration is a “state” of the
problem space. There are two special states, namely the goal state,
i.e., the state to be reached, and the initial state, i.e., the
configuration at the starting point from which the search begins.
There are operators, which determine the moves that generate new
states from the current state. There are path constraints, which limit
the permitted moves. Problem solving is the process of searching for a
solution of the problem of how to generate the goal state from an
initial state. In principle, all states can be generated by applying
the operators to the initial state, then to the resulting state, until
the goal state is reached (Langley et al. 1987: chapter 9). A problem
solution is a sequence of operations leading from the initial to the
goal state.
The basic idea behind computational heuristics is that rules can be
identified that serve as guidelines for finding a solution to a given
problem quickly and efficiently by avoiding undesired states of the
problem space. These rules are best described as rules of thumb. The
aim of constructing a logic of discovery thus becomes the aim of
constructing a heuristics for the efficient search for solutions to
problems. The term “heuristic search” indicates that in
contrast to algorithms, problem-solving procedures lead to results
that are merely provisional and plausible. A solution is not
guaranteed, but heuristic searches are advantageous because they are
more efficient than exhaustive random trial and error searches.
Insofar as it is possible to evaluate whether one set of heuristics is
better—more efficacious—than another, the logic of
discovery turns into a normative theory of discovery.
Arguably, because it is possible to reconstruct important scientific
discovery processes with sets of computational heuristics, the
scientific discovery process can be considered as a special case of
the general mechanism of information processing. In this context, the
term “logic” is not used in the narrow sense of a set of
formal, generally applicable rules to draw inferences but again in a
broad sense as a label for a set of procedural rules.
The computer programs that embody the principles of heuristic searches
in scientific inquiry simulate the paths that scientists followed when
they searched for new theoretical hypotheses. Computer programs such
as BACON (Simon et al. 1981) and KEKADA (Kulkarni and Simon 1988)
utilize sets of problem-solving heuristics to detect regularities in
given data sets. The program would note, for instance, that the values
of a dependent term are constant or that a set of values for a term
x
and a set of values for a term
y
are linearly
related. It would thus “infer” that the dependent term
always has that value or that a linear relation exists between
x
and
y
. These programs can “make
discoveries” in the sense that they can simulate successful
discoveries such as Kepler’s third law (BACON) or the Krebs
cycle (KEKADA).
Computational theories of scientific discoveries have helped identify
and clarify a number of problem-solving strategies. An example of such
a strategy is heuristic means-ends analysis, which involves
identifying specific differences between the present and the goal
situation and searches for operators (processes that will change the
situation) that are associated with the differences that were
detected. Another important heuristic is to divide the problem into
sub-problems and to begin solving the one with the smallest number of
unknowns to be determined (Simon 1977). Computational approaches have
also highlighted the extent to which the generation of new knowledge
draws on existing knowledge that constrains the development of new
hypotheses.
As accounts of scientific discoveries, the early computational
heuristics have some limitations. Compared to the problem spaces given
in computational heuristics, the complex problem spaces for scientific
problems are often ill defined, and the relevant search space and goal
state must be delineated before heuristic assumptions could be
formulated (Bechtel and Richardson 1993: chapter 1). Because a
computer program requires the data from actual experiments, the
simulations cover only certain aspects of scientific discoveries; in
particular, it cannot determine by itself which data is relevant,
which data to relate and what form of law it should look for (Gillies
1996). However, as a consequence of the rise of so-called “deep
learning” methods in data-intensive science, there is renewed
philosophical interest in the question of whether machines can make
discoveries
 (
section 10
).
7. Anomalies and the structure of discovery
Many philosophers maintain that discovery is a legitimate topic for
philosophy of science while abandoning the notion that there is a
logic
of discovery. One very influential approach is Thomas
Kuhn’s analysis of the emergence of novel facts and theories
(Kuhn 1970 [1962]: chapter 6). Kuhn identifies a general pattern of
discovery as part of his account of scientific change. A discovery is
not a simple act, but an extended, complex process, which culminates
in paradigm changes. Paradigms are the symbolic generalizations,
metaphysical commitments, values, and exemplars that are shared by a
community of scientists and that guide the research of that community.
Paradigm-based, normal science does not aim at novelty but instead at
the development, extension, and articulation of accepted paradigms. A
discovery begins with an anomaly, that is, with the recognition that
the expectations induced by an established paradigm are being
violated. The process of discovery involves several aspects:
observations of an anomalous phenomenon, attempts to conceptualize it,
and changes in the paradigm so that the anomaly can be
accommodated.
It is the mark of success of normal science that it does not make
transformative discoveries, and yet such discoveries come about as a
consequence of normal, paradigm-guided science. The more detailed and
the better developed a paradigm, the more precise are its predictions.
The more precisely the researchers know what to expect, the better
they are able to recognize anomalous results and violations of
expectations:
novelty ordinarily emerges only for the man who, knowing with
precision what he should expect, is able to recognize that something
has gone wrong. Anomaly appears only against the background provided
by the paradigm. (Kuhn 1970 [1962]: 65)
Drawing on several historical examples, Kuhn argues that it is usually
impossible to identify the very moment when something was discovered
or even the individual who made the discovery. Kuhn illustrates these
points with the discovery of oxygen (see Kuhn 1970 [1962]:
53–56). Oxygen had not been discovered before 1774 and had been
discovered by 1777. Even before 1774, Lavoisier had noticed that
something was wrong with phlogiston theory, but he was unable to move
forward. Two other investigators, C. W. Scheele and Joseph Priestley,
independently identified a gas obtained from heating solid substances.
But Scheele’s work remained unpublished until after 1777, and
Priestley did not identify his substance as a new sort of gas. In
1777, Lavoisier presented the oxygen theory of combustion, which gave
rise to fundamental reconceptualization of chemistry. But according to
this theory as Lavoisier first presented it, oxygen was not a chemical
element. It was an atomic “principle of acidity” and
oxygen gas was a combination of that principle with caloric. According
to Kuhn, all of these developments are part of the discovery of
oxygen, but none of them can be singled out as “the” act
of discovery.
In pre-paradigmatic periods or in times of paradigm crisis,
theory-induced discoveries may happen. In these periods, scientists
speculate and develop tentative theories, which may lead to novel
expectations and experiments and observations to test whether these
expectations can be confirmed. Even though no precise predictions can
be made, phenomena that are thus uncovered are often not quite what
had been expected. In these situations, the simultaneous exploration
of the new phenomena and articulation of the tentative hypotheses
together bring about discovery.
In cases like the discovery of oxygen, by contrast, which took place
while a paradigm was already in place, the unexpected becomes apparent
only slowly, with difficulty, and against some resistance. Only
gradually do the anomalies become visible as such. It takes time for
the investigators to recognize “both that something is and what
it is” (Kuhn 1970 [1962]: 55). Eventually, a new paradigm
becomes established and the anomalous phenomena become the expected
phenomena.
Recent studies in cognitive neuroscience of brain activity during
periods of conceptual change support Kuhn’s view that conceptual
change is hard to achieve. These studies examine the neural processes
that are involved in the recognition of anomalies and compare them
with the brain activity involved in the processing of information that
is consistent with preferred theories. The studies suggest that the
two types of data are processed differently (Dunbar et al. 2007).
8. Methodologies of discovery
Advocates of the view that there are methodologies of discovery use
the term “logic” in the narrow sense of an algorithmic
procedure to generate new ideas. But like the AI-based theories of
scientific discovery described in
section 6
,
 methodologies of scientific discovery interpret the concept
“discovery” as a label for an extended process of
generating and articulating new ideas and often describe the process
in terms of problem solving. In these approaches, the distinction
between the contexts of discovery and the context of justification is
challenged because the methodology of discovery is understood to play
a justificatory role. Advocates of a methodology of discovery usually
rely on a distinction between different justification procedures,
justification involved in the process of generating new knowledge and
justification involved in testing it. Consequential or
“strong” justifications are methods of testing. The
justification involved in discovery, by contrast, is conceived as
generative (as opposed to consequential) justification
 (
section 8.1
)
 or as weak (as opposed to strong) justification
 (
section 8.2
).
 Again, some terminological ambiguity exists because according to some
philosophers, there are three contexts, not two: Only the initial
conception of a new idea (the creative act is the context of discovery
proper, and between it and justification there exists a separate
context of pursuit (Laudan 1980). But many advocates of methodologies
of discovery regard the context of pursuit as an integral part of the
process of justification. They retain the notion of two contexts and
re-draw the boundaries between the contexts of discovery and
justification as they were drawn in the early 20
th
century.
8.1 Discoverability
The methodology of discovery has sometimes been characterized as a
form of justification that is complementary to the methodology of
testing (Nickles 1984, 1985, 1989). According to the methodology of
testing, empirical support for a theory results from successfully
testing the predictive consequences derived from that theory (and
appropriate auxiliary assumptions). In light of this methodology,
justification for a theory is “consequential
justification,” the notion that a hypothesis is established if
successful
novel
predictions are derived from the theory or
claim. Generative justification complements consequential
justification. Advocates of generative justification hold that there
exists an important form of justification in science that involves
reasoning
to
a claim from data or previously established
results more generally.
One classic example for a generative methodology is the set of
Newton’s rules for the study of natural philosophy. According to
these rules, general propositions are established by deducing them
from the phenomena. The notion of generative justification seeks to
preserve the intuition behind classic conceptions of justification by
deduction. Generative justification amounts to the rational
reconstruction of the discovery path in order to establish its
discoverability had the researchers known what is known now,
regardless of how it was first thought of (Nickles 1985, 1989). The
reconstruction demonstrates in hindsight that the claim could have
been discovered in this manner had the necessary information and
techniques been available. In other words, generative
justification—justification as “discoverability” or
“potential discovery”—justifies a knowledge claim by
deriving it from results that are already established. While
generative justification does not retrace exactly those steps of the
actual discovery path that were actually taken, it is a better
representation of scientists’ actual practices than
consequential justification because scientists tend to construe new
claims from available knowledge. Generative justification is a weaker
version of the traditional ideal of justification by deduction from
the phenomena. Justification by deduction from the phenomena is
complete if a theory or claim is completely determined from what we
already know. The demonstration of discoverability results from the
successful derivation of a claim or theory from the most basic and
most solidly established empirical information.
8.2 Preliminary appraisal
Discoverability as described in the previous paragraphs is a mode of
justification. Like the testing of novel predictions derived from a
hypothesis, generative justification begins when the phase of finding
and articulating a hypothesis worthy of assessing is drawing to a
close. Other approaches to the methodology of discovery are directly
concerned with the procedures involved in devising new hypotheses. The
argument in favor of this kind of methodology is that the procedures
of devising new hypotheses already include elements of appraisal.
These preliminary assessments have been termed “weak”
evaluation procedures (Schaffner 1993). Weak evaluations are relevant
during the process of devising a new hypothesis. They provide reasons
for accepting a hypothesis as promising and worthy of further
attention. Strong evaluations, by contrast, provide reasons for
accepting a hypothesis as (approximately) true or confirmed. Both
“generative” and “consequential” testing as
discussed in the previous section are strong evaluation procedures.
Strong evaluation procedures are rigorous and systematically organized
according to the principles of hypothesis derivation or H-D testing. A
methodology of preliminary appraisal, by contrast, articulates
criteria for the evaluation of a hypothesis prior to rigorous
derivation or testing. It aids the decision about whether to take that
hypothesis seriously enough to develop it further and test it. For
advocates of this version of the methodology of discovery, it is the
task of philosophy of science to characterize sets of constraints and
methodological rules guiding the complex process of prior-to-test
evaluation of hypotheses.
In contrast to the computational approaches discussed above,
strategies of preliminary appraisal are not regarded as
subject-neutral but as specific to particular fields of study.
Philosophers of biology, for instance, have developed a fine-grained
framework to account for the generation and preliminary evaluation of
biological mechanisms (Darden 2002; Craver 2002; Bechtel and
Richardson 1993; Craver and Darden 2013). Some philosophers have
suggested that the phase of preliminary appraisal be further divided
into two phases, the phase of appraising and the phase of revising.
According to Lindley Darden, the phases of generation, appraisal and
revision of descriptions of mechanisms can be characterized as
reasoning processes governed by reasoning strategies. Different
reasoning strategies govern the different phases (Darden 1991, 2002;
Craver 2002; Darden 2009). The generation of hypotheses about
mechanisms, for instance, is governed by the strategy of “schema
instantiation” (see Darden 2002). The discovery of the mechanism
of protein synthesis involved the instantiation of an abstract schema
for chemical reactions: reactant
1
+ reactant
2
=
product. The actual mechanism of protein synthesis was found through
specification and modification of this schema.
Neither of these strategies is deemed necessary for discovery, and
they are not prescriptions for biological research. Rather, these
strategies are deemed sufficient for the discovery of mechanisms. The
methodology of the discovery of mechanisms is an extrapolation from
past episodes of research on mechanisms and the result of a synthesis
of rational reconstructions of several of these historical episodes.
The methodology of discovery is weakly normative in the sense that the
strategies for the discovery of mechanisms that were successful in the
past may prove useful in future biological research (Darden 2002).
8.3 Heuristic strategies
As philosophers of science have again become more attuned to actual
scientific practices, interest in heuristic strategies has also been
revived. Many analysts now agree that discovery processes can be
regarded as problem solving activities, whereby a discovery is a
solution to a problem. Heuristics-based methodologies of discovery are
neither purely subjective and intuitive nor algorithmic or
formalizable; the point is that reasons can be given for pursuing one
or the other problem-solving strategy. These rules are open and do not
guarantee a solution to a problem when applied (Ippoliti 2018). On
this view, scientific researchers are no longer seen as Kuhnian
“puzzle solvers” but as problem solvers and decision
makers in complex, variable, and changing environments (Wimsatt 2007).
Philosophers of discovery working in this tradition draw on a growing
body of literature in cognitive psychology, management science,
operations research, and economy on human reasoning and decision
making in contexts with limited information, under time constraints,
and with sub-optimal means (Gigerenzer & Sturm 2012). Heuristic
strategies characterized in these studies, such as Gigerenzer’s
“tools to theory heuristic” are then applied to understand
scientific knowledge generation (Gigerenzer 1992, Nickles 2018). Other
analysts specify heuristic strategies in a range of scientific fields,
including climate science, neurobiology, and clinical medicine
(Gramelsberger 2011, Schaffner 2008, Gillies 2018). Finally, in
analytic epistemology, formal methods are developed to identify and
assess distinct heuristic strategies currently in use, such as
Bayesian reverse engineering in cognitive science (Zednik and
Jäkel 2016).
As the literature on heuristics continues to grow, it has become clear
that the term “heuristics” is itself used in a variety of
different ways. (For a valuable taxonomy of meanings of
“heuristic,” see Chow 2015, see also Ippoliti 2018.)
Moreover, as in the context of earlier debates about computational
heuristics, debates continue about the limitations of heuristics. The
use of heuristics may come at a cost if heuristics introduce
systematic biases (Wimsatt 2007). Some philosophers thus call for
general principles for the evaluation of heuristic strategies (Hey
2016).
9. Cognitive perspectives on discovery
The approaches to scientific discovery presented in the previous
sections focus on the adoption, articulation, and preliminary
evaluation of ideas or hypotheses prior to rigorous testing, not on
how a novel hypothesis or idea is first thought up. For a long time,
the predominant view among philosophers of discovery was that the
initial step of discovery is a mysterious intuitive leap of the human
mind that cannot be analyzed further. More recent accounts of
discovery informed by evolutionary biology also do not explicate how
new ideas are formed. The generation of new ideas is akin to random,
blind variations of thought processes, which have to be inspected by
the critical mind and assessed as neutral, productive, or useless
(Campbell 1960; see also Hull 1988), but the key processes by which
new ideas are generated are left unanalyzed.
With the recent rapprochement among philosophy of mind, cognitive
science and psychology and the increased integration of empirical
research into philosophy of science, these processes have been
submitted to closer analysis, and philosophical studies of creativity
have seen a surge of interest (e.g. Paul & Kaufman 2014a). The
distinctive feature of these studies is that they integrate
philosophical analyses with empirical work from cognitive science,
psychology, evolutionary biology, and computational neuroscience
(Thagard 2012). Analysts have distinguished different kinds and
different features of creative thinking and have examined certain
features in depth, and from new angles. Recent philosophical research
on creativity comprises conceptual analyses and integrated approaches
based on the assumption that creativity
can
be analyzed and
that empirical research can contribute to the analysis (Paul &
Kaufman 2014b). Two key elements of the cognitive processes involved
in creative thinking that have been in the focus of philosophical
analysis are analogies
 (
section 9.2
)
 and mental models
 (
section 9.3
).
9.1 Kinds and features of creativity
General definitions of creativity highlight novelty or originality and
significance or value as distinctive features of a creative act or
product (Sternberg & Lubart 1999, Kieran 2014, Paul & Kaufman
2014b, although see Hills & Bird 2019). Different kinds of
creativity can be distinguished depending on whether the act or
product is novel for a particular individual or entirely novel.
Psychologist Margaret Boden distinguishes between psychological
creativity (P-creativity) and historical creativity (H-creativity).
P-creativity is a development that is new, surprising and important to
the particular person who comes up with it. H-creativity, by contrast,
is radically novel, surprising, and important—it is generated
for the first time (Boden 2004). Further distinctions have been
proposed, such as anthropological creativity (construed as a human
condition) and metaphysical creativity, a radically new thought or
action in the sense that it is unaccounted for by antecedents and
available knowledge, and thus constitutes a radical break with the
past (Kronfeldner 2009, drawing on Hausman 1984).
Psychological studies analyze the personality traits and creative
individuals’ behavioral dispositions that are conducive to
creative thinking. They suggest that creative scientists share certain
distinct personality traits, including confidence, openness,
dominance, independence, introversion, as well as arrogance and
hostility. (For overviews of recent studies on personality traits of
creative scientists, see Feist 1999, 2006: chapter 5).
Recent work on creativity in philosophy of mind and cognitive science
offers substantive analyses of the cognitive and neural mechanisms
involved in creative thinking (Abrams 2018, Minai et al 2022) and
critical scrutiny of the romantic idea of genius creativity as
something deeply mysterious (Blackburn 2014). Some of this research
aims to characterize features that are common to all creative
processes, such as Thagard and Stewart’s account according to
which creativity results from combinations of representations (Thagard
& Stewart 2011, but see Pasquale and Poirier 2016). Other research
aims to identify the features that are distinctive of scientific
creativity as opposed to other forms of creativity, such as artistic
creativity or creative technological invention (Simonton 2014).
9.2 Analogy
Many philosophers of science highlight the role of analogy in the
development of new knowledge, whereby analogy is understood as a
process of bringing ideas that are well understood in one domain to
bear on a new domain (Thagard 1984; Holyoak and Thagard 1996). An
important source for philosophical thought about analogy is Mary
Hesse’s conception of models and analogies in theory
construction and development. In this approach, analogies are
similarities between different domains. Hesse introduces the
distinction between positive, negative, and neutral analogies (Hesse
1966: 8). If we consider the relation between gas molecules and a
model for gas, namely a collection of billiard balls in random motion,
we will find properties that are common to both domains (positive
analogy) as well as properties that can only be ascribed to the model
but not to the target domain (negative analogy). There is a positive
analogy between gas molecules and a collection of billiard balls
because both the balls and the molecules move randomly. There is a
negative analogy between the domains because billiard balls are
colored, hard, and shiny but gas molecules do not have these
properties. The most interesting properties are those properties of
the model about which we do not know whether they are positive or
negative analogies. This set of properties is the neutral analogy.
These properties are the significant properties because they might
lead to new insights about the less familiar domain. From our
knowledge about the familiar billiard balls, we may be able to derive
new predictions about the behavior of gas molecules, which we could
then test.
Hesse offers a more detailed analysis of the structure of analogical
reasoning through the distinction between horizontal and vertical
analogies between domains. Horizontal analogies between two domains
concern the sameness or similarity between properties of both domains.
If we consider sound and light waves, there are similarities between
them: sound echoes, light reflects; sound is loud, light is bright,
both sound and light are detectable by our senses. There are also
relations among the properties within one domain, such as the causal
relation between sound and the loud tone we hear and, analogously,
between physical light and the bright light we see. These analogies
are vertical analogies. For Hesse, vertical analogies hold the key for
the construction of new theories.
Analogies play several roles in science. Not only do they contribute
to discovery but they also play a role in the development and
evaluation of scientific theories. Current discussions about analogy
and discovery have expanded and refined Hesse’s approach in
various ways. Some philosophers have developed criteria for evaluating
analogy arguments (Bartha 2010). Other work has identified highly
significant analogies that were particularly fruitful for the
advancement of science (Holyoak and Thagard 1996: 186–188;
Thagard 1999: chapter 9). The majority of analysts explore the
features of the cognitive mechanisms through which aspects of a
familiar domain or source are applied to an unknown target domain in
order to understand what is unknown. According to the influential
multi-constraint theory of analogical reasoning developed by Holyoak
and Thagard, the transfer processes involved in analogical reasoning
(scientific and otherwise) are guided or constrained in three main
ways: 1) by the direct similarity between the elements involved; 2) by
the structural parallels between source and target domain; as well as
3) by the purposes of the investigators, i.e., the reasons why the
analogy is considered. Discovery, the formulation of a new hypothesis,
is one such purpose.
“In vivo” investigations of scientists reasoning in their
laboratories have not only shown that analogical reasoning is a key
component of scientific practice, but also that the distance between
source and target depends on the purpose for which analogies are
sought. Scientists trying to fix experimental problems draw analogies
between targets and sources from highly similar domains. In contrast,
scientists attempting to formulate new models or concepts draw
analogies between less similar domains. Analogies between radically
different domains, however, are rare (Dunbar 1997, 2001).
9.3 Mental models
In current cognitive science, human cognition is often explored in
terms of model-based reasoning. The starting point of this approach is
the notion that much of human reasoning, including probabilistic and
causal reasoning as well as problem solving takes place through mental
modeling rather than through the application of logic or
methodological criteria to a set of propositions (Johnson-Laird 1983;
Magnani et al. 1999; Magnani and Nersessian 2002). In model-based
reasoning, the mind constructs a structural representation of a
real-world or imaginary situation and manipulates this structure. In
this perspective, conceptual structures are viewed as models and
conceptual innovation as constructing new models through various
modeling operations. Analogical reasoning—analogical
modeling—is regarded as one of three main forms of model-based
reasoning that appear to be relevant for conceptual innovation in
science. Besides analogical modeling, visual modeling and simulative
modeling or thought experiments also play key roles (Nersessian 1992,
1999, 2009). These modeling practices are constructive in that they
aid the development of novel mental models. The key elements of
model-based reasoning are the call on knowledge of generative
principles and constraints for physical models in a source domain and
the use of various forms of abstraction. Conceptual innovation results
from the creation of new concepts through processes that abstract and
integrate source and target domains into new models (Nersessian
2009).
Some critics have argued that despite the large amount of work on the
topic, the notion of mental model is not sufficiently clear. Thagard
seeks to clarify the concept by characterizing mental models in terms
of neural processes (Thagard 2010). In his approach, mental models are
produced through complex patterns of neural firing, whereby the
neurons and the interconnections between them are dynamic and
changing. A pattern of firing neurons is a representation when there
is a stable causal correlation between the pattern or activation and
the thing that is represented. In this research, questions about the
nature of model-based reasoning are transformed into questions about
the brain mechanisms that produce mental representations.
The above sections again show that the study of scientific discovery
integrates different approaches, combining conceptual analysis of
processes of knowledge generation with empirical work on creativity,
drawing heavily and explicitly on current research in psychology and
cognitive science, and on
in vivo
laboratory observations, as
well as brain imaging techniques (Kounios & Beeman 2009, Thagard
& Stewart 2011).
10. Machine discovery
Earlier critics of AI-based theories of scientific discoveries argued
that a computer cannot devise new concepts but is confined to the
concepts included in the given computer language (Hempel 1985:
119–120). It cannot design new experiments, instruments, or
methods. Subsequent computational research on scientific discovery was
driven by the motivation to contribute computational tools to aid
scientists in their research (Addis et al. 2016). It appears that
computational methods can be used to generate new results leading to
refereed scientific publications in astrophysics, cancer research,
ecology, and other fields (Langley 2000). However, the philosophical
discussion has continued about the question of whether these methods
really generate new knowledge or whether they merely speed up data
processing. It is also still an open question whether data-intensive
science is fundamentally different from traditional research, for
instance regarding the status of hypothesis or theory in
data-intensive research (Pietsch 2015).
In the wake of recent developments in machine learning, some older
discussions about automated discovery have been revived. The
availability of vastly improved computational tools and software for
data analysis has stimulated new discussions about computer-generated
discovery (see Leonelli 2020). It is largely uncontroversial that
machine learning tools can aid discovery, for instance in research on
antibiotics (Stokes et al, 2020). The notion of “robot
scientist” is mostly used metaphorically, and the vision that
human scientists may one day be replaced by computers – by
successors of the laboratory automation systems “Adam” and
“Eve”, allegedly the first “robot scientists”
– is evoked in writings for broader audiences (see King et al.
2009, Williams et al. 2015, for popularized descriptions of these
systems), although some interesting ethical challenges do arise from
“superhuman AI” (see Russell 2021). It also appears that,
on the notion that products of creative acts are both novel and
valuable, AI systems should be called “creative,” an
implication which not all analysts will find plausible (Boden
2014)
Philosophical analyses focus on various questions arising from the
processes involving human-machine complexes. One issue relevant to the
problem of scientific discovery arises from the opacity of machine
learning. If machine learning indeed escapes human understanding, how
can we be warranted to say that knowledge or understanding is
generated by deep learning tools? Might we have reason to say that
humans and machines are “co-developers” of knowledge
(Tamaddoni-Nezhad et al. 2021)?
11. Social epistemology and discovery
New perspectives on scientific discovery have also opened up in the
context of social epistemology (see Goldman & O’Connor
2021). Social epistemology investigates knowledge production as a
group process, specifically the epistemic effects of group composition
in terms of cognitive diversity and unity and social interactions
within groups or institutions such as testimony and trust, peer
disagreement and critique, and group justification, among others. On
this view, discovery is a collective achievement, and the task is to
explore how assorted social-epistemic activities or practices have an
impact on the knowledge generated by groups in question. There are
obvious implications for debates about scientific discovery of recent
research in the different branches of social epistemology. Social
epistemologists have examined individual cognitive agents in their
roles as group members (as providers of information or as critics) and
the interactions among these members (Longino 2001), groups as
aggregates of diverse agents, or the entire group
as
epistemic agent (e.g., Koons 2021, Dragos 2019).
Standpoint theory, for instance, explores the role of outsiders in
knowledge generation, considering how the sociocultural structures and
practices in which individuals are embedded aid or obstruct the
generation of creative ideas. According to standpoint theorists,
people with standpoint are politically aware and politically engaged
people outside the mainstream. Because people with standpoint have
different experiences and access to different domains of expertise
than most members of a culture, they can draw on rich conceptual
resources for creative thinking (Solomon 2007).
Social epistemologists examining groups as aggregates of agents
consider to what extent diversity among group members is conducive to
knowledge production and whether and to what extent beliefs and
attitudes must be shared among group members to make collective
knowledge possible (Bird 2014). This is still an open question. Some
formal approaches to model the influence of diversity on knowledge
generation suggest that cognitive diversity is beneficial to
collective knowledge generation (Weisberg and Muldoon 2009), but
others have criticized the model (Alexander et al (2015), see also
Thoma (2015) and Poyhönen (2017) for further discussion).
12. Integrated approaches to knowledge generation
This essay has illustrated that philosophy of discovery has come full
circle. Philosophy of discovery has once again become a thriving field
of philosophical study, now intersecting with, and drawing on
philosophical and empirical studies of creative thinking, problem
solving under uncertainty, collective knowledge production, and
machine learning. Recent approaches to discovery are typically
explicitly interdisciplinary and integrative, cutting across previous
distinctions among hypothesis generation and theory building, data
collection, assessment, and selection; as well as
descriptive-analytic, historical, and normative perspectives (Danks
& Ippoliti 2018, Michel 2021). The goal no longer is to provide
one overarching account of scientific discovery but to produce
multifaceted analyses of past and present activities of knowledge
generation in all their complexity and heterogeneity that are
illuminating to the non-scientist and the scientific researcher alike.
Bibliography
Abraham, A. 2019,
The Neuroscience of Creativity,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Addis, M., Sozou, P.D., Gobet, F. and Lane, P. R., 2016,
“Computational scientific discovery and cognitive science
theories”, in Mueller, V. C. (ed.)
Computing and
Philosophy
, Springer, 83–87.
Alexander, J., Himmelreich, J., and Thompson, C. 2015, Epistemic
Landscapes, Optimal Search, and the Division of Cognitive Labor,
Philosophy of Science
82: 424–453.
Arabatzis, T. 1996, “Rethinking the ‘Discovery’
of the Electron,”
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science Part B Studies In History and Philosophy of Modern
Physics
, 27: 405–435.
Bartha, P., 2010,
By Parallel Reasoning: The Construction and
Evaluation of Analogical Arguments
, New York: Oxford University
Press.
Bechtel, W. and R. Richardson, 1993,
Discovering
Complexity
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Benjamin, A.C., 1934, “The Mystery of Scientific Discovery
”
Philosophy of Science
, 1: 224–36.
Bird, A. 2014, “When is There a Group that Knows?
Distributed Cognition, Scientific Knowledge, and the Social Epistemic
Subject”, in J. Lackey (ed.),
Essays in Collective
Epistemology
, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 42–63.
Blackburn, S. 2014, “Creativity and Not-So-Dumb Luck”,
in Paul, E. S. and Kaufman, S. B. (eds.),
The Philosophy of
Creativity: New Essays
, New York: Oxford Academic online edn.
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199836963.003.0008.
Blackwell, R.J., 1969,
Discovery in the Physical
Sciences
, Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Boden, M.A., 2004,
The Creative Mind: Myths and
Mechanisms
, London: Routledge.
–––, 2014, “Creativity and Artificial
Intelligence: A Contradiction in Terms?”, in Paul, E. S. and
Kaufman, S. B. (eds.),
The Philosophy of Creativity: New
Essays
(New York: Oxford Academic online edn.,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199836963.003.0012
.
Brannigan, A., 1981,
The Social Basis of Scientific
Discoveries
, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brem, S. and L.J. Rips, 2000, “Explanation and Evidence in
Informal Argument”,
Cognitive Science
, 24:
573–604.
Campbell, D., 1960, “Blind Variation and Selective Retention
in Creative Thought as in Other Knowledge Processes”,
Psychological Review
, 67: 380–400.
Carmichael, R.D., 1922, “The Logic of Discovery”,
The Monist
, 32: 569–608.
–––, 1930,
The Logic of Discovery
,
Chicago: Open Court.
Chow, S. 2015, “Many Meanings of
‘Heuristic’”,
British Journal for the Philosophy
of Science
, 66: 977–1016
Craver, C.F., 2002, “Interlevel Experiments, Multilevel
Mechanisms in the Neuroscience of Memory”,
Philosophy of
Science Supplement
, 69: 83–97.
Craver, C.F. and L. Darden, 2013,
In Search of Mechanisms:
Discoveries across the Life Sciences
, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Curd, M., 1980, “The Logic of Discovery: An Analysis of
Three Approaches”, in T. Nickles (ed.)
Scientific Discovery,
Logic, and Rationality
, Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 201–19.
Danks, D. & Ippoliti, E. (eds.) 2018,
Building Theories:
Heuristics and Hypotheses in Sciences
, Cham: Springer.
Darden, L., 1991,
Theory Change in Science: Strategies from
Mendelian Genetics
, New York: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2002, “Strategies for Discovering
Mechanisms: Schema Instantiation, Modular Subassembly,
Forward/Backward Chaining”,
Philosophy of Science
, 69:
S354-S65.
–––, 2009, “Discovering Mechanisms in
Molecular Biology: Finding and Fixing Incompleteness and
Incorrectness”, in J. Meheus and T. Nickles (eds.),
Models
of Discovery and Creativity
, Dordrecht: Springer,
43–55.
Dewey, J. 1910,
How We Think
. Boston: D.C. Heath
Dragos, C., 2019, “Groups Can Know How”
American
Philosophical Quarterly
56: 265–276
Ducasse, C.J., 1951, “Whewell’s Philosophy of
Scientific Discovery II”,
The Philosophical Review
,
60(2): 213–34.
Dunbar, K., 1997, “How scientists think: On-line creativity
and conceptual change in science”, in T.B. Ward, S.M. Smith, and
J. Vaid (eds.),
Conceptual Structures and Processes: Emergence,
Discovery, and Change
, Washington, DC: American Psychological
Association Press, 461–493.
–––, 2001, “The Analogical Paradox: Why
Analogy is so Easy in Naturalistic Settings Yet so Difficult in
Psychological Laboratories”, in D. Gentner, K.J. Holyoak, and
B.N. Kokinov (eds.),
The Analogical Mind: Perspectives from
Cognitive Science
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Dunbar, K, J. Fugelsang, and C Stein, 2007, “Do Naïve
Theories Ever Go Away? Using Brain and Behavior to Understand Changes
in Concepts”, in M. Lovett and P. Shah (eds.),
Thinking with
Data: 33rd Carnegie Symposium on Cognition
, Mahwah: Erlbaum,
193–205.
Feist, G.J., 1999, “The Influence of Personality on Artistic
and Scientific Creativity”, in R.J. Sternberg (ed.),
Handbook of Creativity
, New York: Cambridge University Press,
273–96.
–––, 2006,
The psychology of science and the
origins of the scientific mind
, New Haven: Yale University
Press.
Gillies D., 1996,
Artificial intelligence and scientific
method
. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
–––, 2018 “Discovering Cures in
Medicine” in Danks, D. & Ippoliti, E. (eds.),
Building
Theories: Heuristics and Hypotheses in Sciences
, Cham: Springer,
83–100.
Goldman, Alvin & O’Connor, C., 2021, “Social
Epistemology”, The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter
2021 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2021/entries/epistemology-social/>.
Gramelsberger, G. 2011, “What Do Numerical (Climate) Models
Really Represent?”
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science
42: 296–302.
Gutting, G., 1980, “Science as Discovery”,
Revue
internationale de philosophie
, 131: 26–48.
Hanson, N.R., 1958,
Patterns of Discovery
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
–––, 1960, “Is there a Logic of Scientific
Discovery?”,
Australasian Journal of Philosophy
, 38:
91–106.
–––, 1965, “Notes Toward a Logic of
Discovery”, in R.J. Bernstein (ed.),
Perspectives on Peirce.
Critical Essays on Charles Sanders Peirce
, New Haven and London:
Yale University Press, 42–65.
Harman, G.H., 1965, “The Inference to the Best
Explanation”,
Philosophical Review
, 74.
Hausman, C. R. 1984,
A Discourse on Novelty and Creation
,
New York: SUNY Press.
Hempel, C.G., 1985, “Thoughts in the Limitations of
Discovery by Computer”, in K. Schaffner (ed.),
Logic of
Discovery and Diagnosis in Medicine
, Berkeley: University of
California Press, 115–22.
Hesse, M., 1966,
Models and Analogies in Science
, Notre
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press.
Hey, S. 2016 “Heuristics and Meta-heuristics in Scientific
Judgement”,
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 67: 471–495
Hills, A., Bird, A. 2019, “Against Creativity”,
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
, 99:
694–713.
Holyoak, K.J. and P. Thagard, 1996,
Mental Leaps: Analogy in
Creative Thought
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Howard, D., 2006, “Lost Wanderers in the Forest of
Knowledge: Some Thoughts on the Discovery-Justification
Distinction”, in J. Schickore and F. Steinle (eds.),
Revisiting Discovery and Justification. Historical and
Philosophical Perspectives on the Context Distinction
, Dordrecht:
Springer, 3–22.
Hoyningen-Huene, P., 1987, “Context of Discovery and Context
of Justification”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science
, 18: 501–15.
Hull, D.L., 1988,
Science as Practice: An Evolutionary Account
of the Social and Conceptual Development of Science
, Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Ippoliti, E. 2018, “Heuristic Logic. A Kernel” in
Danks, D. & Ippoliti, E. (eds.)
Building Theories: Heuristics
and Hypotheses in Sciences
, Cham: Springer, 191–212
Jantzen, B.C., 2016, “Discovery without a
‘Logic’ would be a Miracle”,
Synthese
, 193:
3209–3238.
Johnson-Laird, P., 1983,
Mental Models
, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Kieran, M., 2014, “Creativity as a Virtue of
Character,” in E. Paul and S. B. Kaufman (eds.),
The
Philosophy of Creativity: New Essays
. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 125–44
King, R. D. et al. 2009, “The Automation of Science”,
Science
324: 85–89.
Koehler, D.J., 1991, “Explanation, Imagination, and
Confidence in Judgment”,
Psychological Bulletin
, 110:
499–519.
Koertge, N. 1980, “Analysis as a Method of Discovery during
the Scientific Revolution” in Nickles, T. (ed.)
Scientific
Discovery, Logic, and Rationality
vol. I, Dordrecht: Reidel,
139–157
Koons, J.R. 2021, “Knowledge as a Collective Status”,
Analytic Philosophy
,
https://doi.org/10.1111/phib.12224
Kounios, J. and Beeman, M. 2009, “The Aha! Moment : The
Cognitive Neuroscience of Insight”,
Current Directions in
Psychological Science
, 18: 210–16.
Kordig, C., 1978, “Discovery and Justification”,
Philosophy of Science
, 45: 110–17.
Kronfeldner, M. 2009, “Creativity Naturalized”,
The Philosophical Quarterly
59: 577–592.
Kuhn, T.S., 1970 [1962],
The Structure of Scientific
Revolutions
, 2
nd
edition, Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press; first edition, 1962.
Kulkarni, D. and H.A. Simon, 1988, “The processes of
scientific discovery: The strategy of experimentation”,
Cognitive Science
, 12: 139–76.
Langley, P., 2000, “The Computational Support of Scientific
Discovery”,
International Journal of Human-Computer
Studies
, 53: 393–410.
Langley, P., H.A. Simon, G.L. Bradshaw, and J.M. Zytkow, 1987,
Scientific Discovery: Computational Explorations of the Creative
Processes
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Laudan, L., 1980, “Why Was the Logic of Discovery
Abandoned?” in T. Nickles (ed.),
Scientific Discovery
(Volume I), Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 173–83.
Leonelli, S. 2020, “Scientific Research and Big Data”,
The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2020 Edition), Edward
N. Zalta (ed.), URL =
<https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2020/entries/science-big-data/>
Leplin, J., 1987, “The Bearing of Discovery on
Justification”,
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
, 17:
805–14.
Longino, H. 2001,
The Fate of Knowledge
, Princeton:
Princeton University Press
Lugg, A., 1985, “The Process of Discovery”,
Philosophy of Science
, 52: 207–20.
Magnani, L., 2000,
Abduction, Reason, and Science: Processes
of Discovery and Explanation
, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
–––, 2009, “Creative Abduction and
Hypothesis Withdrawal”, in J. Meheus and T. Nickles (eds.),
Models of Discovery and Creativity
, Dordrecht: Springer.
Magnani, L. and N.J. Nersessian, 2002,
Model-Based Reasoning:
Science, Technology, and Values
, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Magnani, L., N.J. Nersessian, and P. Thagard, 1999,
Model-Based Reasoning in Scientific Discovery
, Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Michel, J. (ed.) 2021,
Making Scientific Discoveries.
Interdisciplinary Reflections
, Brill | mentis.
Minai, A., Doboli, S., Iyer, L. 2022 “Models of Creativity
and Ideation: An Overview” in Ali A. Minai, Jared B. Kenworthy,
Paul B. Paulus, Simona Doboli (eds.),
Creativity and Innovation.
Cognitive, Social, and Computational Approaches
, Springer,
21–46.
Nersessian, N.J., 1992, “How do scientists think? Capturing
the dynamics of conceptual change in science”, in R. Giere
(ed.),
Cognitive Models of Science
, Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 3–45.
–––, 1999, “Model-based reasoning in
conceptual change”, in L. Magnani, N.J. Nersessian and P.
Thagard (eds.),
Model-Based Reasoning in Scientific
Discovery
, New York: Kluwer, 5–22.
–––, 2009, “Conceptual Change: Creativity,
Cognition, and Culture ” in J. Meheus and T. Nickles (eds.),
Models of Discovery and Creativity
, Dordrecht: Springer,
127–66.
Newell, A. and H. A Simon, 1971, “Human Problem Solving: The
State of the Theory in 1970”,
American Psychologist
,
26: 145–59.
Newton, I. 1718,
Opticks; or, A Treatise of the Reflections,
Inflections and Colours of Light
, London: Printed for W. and J.
Innys, Printers to the Royal Society.
Nickles, T., 1984, “Positive Science and
Discoverability”,
PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting
of the Philosophy of Science Association
, 1984: 13–27.
–––, 1985, “Beyond Divorce: Current Status
of the Discovery Debate”,
Philosophy of Science
, 52:
177–206.
–––, 1989, “Truth or Consequences?
Generative versus Consequential Justification in Science”,
PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of
Science Association
, 1988, 393–405.
–––, 2018, “TTT: A Fast Heuristic to New
Theories?” in Danks, D. & Ippoliti, E. (eds.)
Building
Theories: Heuristics and Hypotheses in Sciences
, Cham: Springer,
213–244.
Pasquale, J.-F. de and Poirier, P. 2016, “Convolution and
Modal Representations in Thagard and Stewart’s Neural Theory of
Creativity: A Critical Analysis ”,
Synthese
, 193:
1535–1560
Paul, E. S. and Kaufman, S. B. (eds.), 2014a,
The Philosophy
of Creativity: New Essays
, New York: Oxford Academic online edn.,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199836963.001.0001.
–––, 2014b, “Introducing: The Philosophy
of Creativity”, in Paul, E. S. and Kaufman, S. B. (eds.),
The Philosophy of Creativity: New Essays
(New York: Oxford
Academic online edn.,
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199836963.003.0001.
Pietsch, W. 2015, “Aspects of Theory-Ladenness in
Data-Intensive Science”,
Philosophy of Science
82:
905–916.
Popper, K., 2002 [1934/1959],
The Logic of Scientific
Discovery
, London and New York: Routledge; original published in
German in 1934; first English translation in 1959.
Pöyhönen, S. 2017, “Value of Cognitive Diversity
in Science”,
Synthese
, 194(11): 4519–4540.
doi:10.1007/s11229–016-1147-4
Pulte, H. 2019, “‘‘Tis Much Better to Do a
Little with Certainty’: On the Reception of Newton’s
Methodology”, in
The Reception of Isaac Newton in
Europe
, Pulte, H, and Mandelbrote, S. (eds.), Continuum
Publishing Corporation, 355–84.
Reichenbach, H., 1938,
Experience and Prediction. An Analysis
of the Foundations and the Structure of Knowledge
, Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press.
Richardson, A., 2006, “Freedom in a Scientific Society:
Reading the Context of Reichenbach’s Contexts”, in J.
Schickore and F. Steinle (eds.),
Revisiting Discovery and
Justification. Historical and Philosophical Perspectives on the
Context Distinction
, Dordrecht: Springer, 41–54.
Russell, S. 2021, “Human-Compatible Artificial
Intelligence”, in
Human Like Machine Intelligence
,
Muggleton, S. and Charter, N. (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University Press,
4–23
Schaffer, S., 1986, “Scientific Discoveries and the End of
Natural Philosophy”,
Social Studies of Science
, 16:
387–420.
–––, 1994, “Making Up Discovery”, in
M.A. Boden (ed.),
Dimensions of Creativity
, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 13–51.
Schaffner, K., 1993,
Discovery and Explanation in Biology and
Medicine
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
–––, 2008 “Theories, Models, and Equations
in Biology: The Heuristic Search for Emergent Simplifications in
Neurobiology”,
Philosophy of Science
, 75:
1008–21.
Schickore, J. and F. Steinle, 2006,
Revisiting Discovery and
Justification. Historical and Philosophical Perspectives on the
Context Distinction
, Dordrecht: Springer.
Schiller, F.C.S., 1917, “Scientific Discovery and Logical
Proof”, in C.J. Singer (ed.),
Studies in the History and
Method of Science
(Volume 1), Oxford: Clarendon,
235–89.
Simon, H.A., 1973, “Does Scientific Discovery Have a
Logic?”,
Philosophy of Science
, 40: 471–80.
–––, 1977,
Models of Discovery and Other
Topics in the Methods of Science
, Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
Simon, H.A., P.W. Langley, and G.L. Bradshaw, 1981,
“Scientific Discovery as Problem Solving”,
Synthese
, 47: 1–28.
Smith, G.E., 2002, “The Methodology of the
Principia
”, in G.E. Smith and I.B. Cohen (eds),
The
Cambridge Companion to Newton
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 138–73.
Simonton, D. K., “Hierarchies of Creative Domains:
Disciplinary Constraints on Blind Variation and Selective
Retention”, in Paul, E. S. and Kaufman, S. B. (eds),
The
Philosophy of Creativity: New Essays
, New York: Oxford Academic
online edn.
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199836963.003.0013
Snyder, L.J., 1997, “Discoverers’ Induction”,
Philosophy of Science
, 64: 580–604.
Solomon, M., 2009, “Standpoint and Creativity”,
Hypatia
: 226–37.
Sternberg, R J. and T. I. Lubart, 1999, “The concept of
creativity: Prospects and paradigms,” in R. J. Sternberg (ed.)
Handbook of Creativity
, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 3–15.
Stokes, D., 2011, “Minimally Creative Thought”,
Metaphilosophy
, 42: 658–81.
Tamaddoni-Nezhad, A., Bohan, D., Afroozi Milani, G., Raybould, A.,
Muggleton, S., 2021, “Human–Machine Scientific
Discovery”, in
Human Like Machine Intelligence
,
Muggleton, S. and Charter, N., (eds.), Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 297–315
Thagard, P., 1984, “Conceptual Combination and Scientific
Discovery”,
PSA: Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the
Philosophy of Science Association
, 1984(1): 3–12.
–––, 1999,
How Scientists Explain
Disease
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
–––, 2010, “How Brains Make Mental
Models”, in L. Magnani, N.J. Nersessian and P. Thagard (eds.),
Model-Based Reasoning in Science & Technology
, Berlin and
Heidelberg: Springer, 447–61.
–––, 2012,
The Cognitive Science of
Science
, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thagard, P. and Stewart, T. C., 2011, “The AHA! Experience:
Creativity Through Emergent Binding in Neural Networks”,
Cognitive Science
, 35: 1–33.
Thoma, Johanna, 2015, “The Epistemic Division of Labor
Revisited”,
Philosophy of Science
, 82: 454–472.
doi:10.1086/681768
Weber, M., 2005,
Philosophy of Experimental Biology
,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Whewell, W., 1996 [1840],
The Philosophy of the Inductive
Sciences
(Volume II), London: Routledge/Thoemmes.
Weisberg, M. and Muldoon, R., 2009, “Epistemic Landscapes
and the Division of Cognitive Labor”,
Philosophy of
Science
, 76: 225–252. doi:10.1086/644786
Williams, K. et al. 2015, “Cheaper Faster Drug Development
Validated by the Repositioning of Drugs against Neglected Tropical
Diseases”,
Journal of the Royal Society Interface
12:
20141289. http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2014.1289.
Zahar, E., 1983, “Logic of Discovery or Psychology of
Invention?”,
British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science
, 34: 243–61.
Zednik, C. and Jäkel, F. 2016 “Bayesian
Reverse-Engineering Considered as a Research Strategy for Cognitive
Science”,
Synthese
, 193, 3951–3985.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
[Please contact the author with suggestions.]
Related Entries
abduction
|
analogy and analogical reasoning
|
cognitive science
|
epistemology: social
|
knowledge: analysis of
|
Kuhn, Thomas
|
models in science
|
Newton, Isaac:
Philosophiae Naturalis Principia Mathematica
|
Popper, Karl
|
rationality: historicist theories of
|
scientific method
|
scientific research and big data
|
Whewell, William