Simplicius
First published Wed Jun 3, 2020
Simplicius of Cilicia (ca. 480–560 CE), roughly a contemporary
of John Philoponus, is without doubt the most important Neoplatonic
commentator on Aristotle and one of the two most influential exegetes
within the Aristotelian tradition, along with Alexander of Aphrodisias
(around 200 CE). Simplicius’ works are an unmatched source for
the intellectual traditions that preceded him: Presocratic, Platonic,
and especially the Peripatetic tradition. He is also an independent
thinker in his own right, with a coherent philosophical agenda. Best
known for his tendency to harmonise Plato and Aristotle, he
nevertheless criticised Aristotle on several occasions and considered
himself a loyal follower of Plato. Writing in an age when Christianity
was the dominant religious and political view, Simplicius aimed to
show that the Hellenic tradition is not only much older, but also more
venerable and more coherent than the Christian tradition. Unimpressed
by charges of alleged contradictions among Greek philosophers,
Simplicius repeatedly proclaimed that “the ancient wisdom
(
palaia philosophia
) remains unrefuted” (
In
Phys
. 77.11). It is also noteworthy that, like Proclus and other
Neoplatonists, Simplicius presents himself as a thinker for whom
philosophy and theology form a complete unity. As has frequently been
observed, Simplicius’ works, despite their scholarly outlook,
have an important spiritual dimension (see
§5
).
Simplicius’ commentaries have only recently been studied with an
eye to his own philosophical views. He was long considered a mere
source for Greek philosophy, and, as noted by Baltussen (2010: 714),
Simplicius’ importance as a source for ancient Greek philosophy
and science has long overshadowed his contributions as an independent
thinker.
Nineteenth-century
Quellenforschung
was especially interested
in his
Commentary on the Physics
, which was edited in two
volumes (
Simplicii in Aristotelis Physicorum libros quattuor
priores/quattuor posteriores
, comprising almost 1500 pages) by
Hermann Diels; this commentary served as the basis for Diels’
edition of the
Doxographi Graeci
(
Greek
Doxographers
), which includes the main doctrines on natural
philosophy according to ancient doxographical compendia.
One of the aims of this entry is to emphasise that Simplicius’
writings have much more to offer than a mere doxography of his
predecessors—but always bearing in mind that it is only possible
to appreciate how Simplicius arranges and interprets the material at
his disposal by duly attending to his Neoplatonic agenda.
1. Life and Works
The Commentaries of Simplicius (Structure / Contents)
2. Simplicius as a Commentator: General Remarks
3. The Decisive Role of Alexander of Aphrodisias
4. How to Comment on Aristotle as a Neoplatonist?
5. The Commentary as Spiritual Exercise
6. The Harmony of Plato and Aristotle and Christian Threads
7. Simplicius’ Legacy
Bibliography
List of abbreviations
Introductions, monographs, and collected volumes
Editions and Translations of His Commentaries
On Aristotle’s
On the Heavens
On Aristotle’s
Categories
On Aristotle’s
On the Soul
On Epictetus’
Handbook
On Aristotle’s
Physics
Editions and Translations of other Ancient Authors
Scholarly works
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
Acknowledgements
1. Life and Works
Not much is known about Simplicius’ life. In
Histories
II, 30.1 [Keydell], Agathias informs us
that Simplicius was born in Cilicia (south coastal region of Asia
Minor; today southern Turkey, north to northeast of the island
Cyprus). According to Simplicius’ own commentaries, he was
educated in Alexandria by Ammonius, son of Hermias (
In Cael.
271.19), and in Athens by Damascius (
In Phys.
601.19). Hence,
he refers to Proclus as “teacher of my teachers” (
In
Phys.
611.11–12; 795.4–5) and “successor of
Plato (
diadochos
, i.e., head of the school) who lived shortly
before me” (
In Cael.
640.24–25). The following
text from Simplicius’
Commentary on the Physics
illustrates well the important role that Proclus played in the
tradition of Athenian Neoplatonism:
All the philosophers after Proclus and down to my time, more or less,
followed Proclus not only on this detail, but in all the other dogmas,
except for Asclepiodorus, Proclus’ most gifted student, and our
Damascius. The former because of his immense talent, took pleasure in
innovating in doctrinal matters, whereas Damascius, because of his
love of work and his sympathy for Iamblichus, was not afraid to
reconsider many of Proclus’ dogmas. (Simplicius,
In
Phys.
795.11–17, translated by I. Hadot and M. Chase, in I.
Hadot 2015: 126 n. 223
Several passages in Simplicius’ commentaries also testify to the
crucial role that Iamblichus’ philosophy and exegesis played for
him (see
§1
and
§5
in the supplement on “The Commentaries of Simplicius”).
 Simplicius’ controversy with the Christian commentator
Philoponus, who taught in Alexandria, regarding whether the world was
created in time (see
§3
in the supplement on “The Commentaries of Simplicius”) is well known. However, it seems that they never met personally
(“[I] feel no hostility against this man whom, to my knowledge,
I have never seen”;
In Cael.
26.18–19, translated
by C. Wildberg).
In 529, a year that some historians have considered the end of
Antiquity, emperor Justinian ordered that “no one was any longer
allowed to teach philosophy and astronomy” (this is often
referred to as the closure of the Platonic Academy; for details and
further literature see Goulet & Coda 2016: 344). It is assumed
that this edict mainly targeted non-Christian philosophers such as
Neoplatonists and Manichaeans. Following this prohibition, but not
immediately, Simplicius travelled with six other Neoplatonic
philosophers under the lead of Damascius to the court of the Persian
King Chosroes, who had only come to power in Ctesiphon in 531.
Disappointed by their experience in Persia—the historian
Agathias suggests that the philosophers at first considered Chosroes a
kind of ideal Platonic philosopher king—and protected by a peace
treaty between Persia and Rome in 532, the philosophers left the
country, apparently several months after their arrival. Where the
seven went after that is still a matter of debate. The treaty says,
inter alia
, that
these men should be allowed to return to their own country and live
there henceforth in safety, without being forced to adopt opinions
which they did not hold, or to change their own faith. (translated by
A. Cameron 1969/1970: 169)
Damascius recorded that he returned in 538 to his home country of
Syria (Hoffmann 1994: 590–591). Did the others follow him, or
did they return to Athens, Syria, or Harran (ancient Carrhae, in the
north of Mesopotamia, close to the Syrian border)? This question has
not been satisfactorily answered (for the ongoing discussion, see
Goulet & Coda 2016: 343–346; Watts 2005: 290–298).
However, it seems clear that, in order to write his
commentaries—which, as most scholars assume, were composed after
returning from Chosroes’ court (I. Hadot 2014:
135)—Simplicius needed quite an extensive library. Therefore, he
could only have returned to a place that provided such a library.
Simplicius wrote four commentaries that survive today (on
Epictetus’
Handbook
and Aristotle’s
Categories
,
Physics
, and
De Caelo
). It is
debatable whether, as univocally attested by the all manuscripts,
Simplicius is also the author of a fifth commentary, on
Aristotle’s
De anima
. Although there are several other
works that he might have written, these do not include any
commentaries on Plato aside from one work on the
Phaedo
(Goulet & Coda 2016: 361–364, 390–394; see
In
Cael.
369.4–6 and
In Epict.
I, 350–354
[Hadot]). As is discussed in the supplement
The Commentaries of Simplicius
, it is
 difficult to determine the order and periods in which Simplicius
 composed his commentaries.
Although there are no extant commentaries on Plato that are known to
come from Simplicius’ hand, Simplicius’ readers will
notice his intimate familiarity with and highest esteem for Plato.
Simplicius’ commentaries constitute a rich source for Platonic
philosophy, and he is well known for his tendency to harmonise Plato
and Aristotle (see
§6
).
 His work continues a tendency, probably initiated by Porphyry, to
make Plato’s pupil an integral part of the Platonic tradition,
reading Aristotle through Platonic—or rather
Neoplatonic—lenses. Simplicius frequently chooses a Platonic
dialogue in order to compare Plato’s and Aristotle’s
philosophy in a specific domain by way of contrast—for example,
when he comments on the
Physics
and the
De Caelo
,
where the
Timaeus
is always at hand. The
Sophist
and
his the doctrine of the highest kinds (
megista genê
)
play an important role in Simplicius’ commentary on the
Categories
(cf. already in Plotinus VI 1–3
[42–44]). It should also be noted that Iamblichus’
Neoplatonic psychology, which can be considered a systematisation of
Plato’s views, lies in the background throughout
the
Commentary on the De anima
. When Simplicius finds
references to Eleatic philosophy in Aristotle (especially in
Physics
I), the
Sophist
and
Parmenides
also
figure prominently.
It is also important to identify Simplicius’ purpose and
intended audience in writing his compendious exegetical works. Given
the sheer size of the commentaries and their argumentative structure,
which at times is rather complex, it is difficult to imagine that
Simplicius is aiming at students. Moreover, given the uneven length of
the exegeses of specific
lemmata
and the considerable number
of so-called digressions (see
§2
),
 it is not clear how a teacher could organise the material in the
commentaries for a series of lessons. To be suitable for the
classroom, Simplicius’ style would have needed to be much more
didactic and elementary. Although Baltussen (2010: 717) maintains that
Simplicius writes mostly for a student audience and that his works are
intended to be read (
In Cael.
377.32, 653.9;
In
Phys.
111.17, 762.29),
this seems unlikely. Rather, his underlying incentive seems to be to
preserve as much original material (from Aristotle, his predecessors,
and his commentators) as possible and to present it in a way that
brings the unity of the Hellenic tradition to the fore. This would
explain why Simplicius continuously reminds his readers not only of
the harmony (
sumphônia
) between Plato and Aristotle,
with Aristotle as a loyal member of the Platonic tradition, but also
the continuity of Aristotle with the Presocratics, especially the
Pythagoreans and the Eleatics. There are several indications in
Simplicius’ collective text that he is addressing readers of
“considerable sophistication” (Bowen 2013: 5) and that the
target audience, as should be suspected given his use of the first
person plural, is
contemporary Platonists in some community (to which he did or did not
belong) or […] readers imagined to be of like mind in a
counterfactual present. (2013: 5)
This fully accords with the view that Simplicius probably did not
teach in any school and that when he wrote his commentaries, there was
therefore no philosophical curriculum. As Golitsis (2018: 95) has
convincingly suggested,
[T]here was no place where they [sc. the Platonic philosophers] could
be trained […]. Simplicius invites them to learn by themselves
or, if possible, in groups. (see
In Cat.
7.33–8.2)
What makes Simplicius’ commentaries a unique source for the
history of philosophy before him is the fact that he preserved so much
material from his predecessors, often in verbatim quotations:
[…] Simplicius, clearly aware of the fact that the works of
many philosophers earlier, contemporary with, and later than Aristotle
were in danger of disappearing made a point of quoting from them at
length. And so he has often preserved for us texts and information not
extant elsewhere. Suffice it to mention, by way of example, the
fragments of Anaximander, Parmenides, Zeno, Melissus, Empedocles,
Anaxagoras, Theophrastus (especially his
History of
Philosophy
or
Physikôn Doxai
), Eudemus (especially
his
History of Geometry
), Xenocrates, Epicurus, The Stoics,
Porphyry, etc. It is noteworthy that in the case of the Presocratics
Simplicius alone has preserved at least two thirds of all the verbatim
quotations. (Tarán 1987b: 247)
2. Simplicius as a Commentator: General Remarks
In his introduction to the
Commentary on the Categories
,
Simplicius provides a neat characterisation of the good commentator
(
axion exêgêtên
) on Aristotle (and
Plato):
The worthy exegete of Aristotle’s writings must not fall wholly
short of the latter’s greatness of intellect
(
megalonoia
). He must also have experience of everything the
Philosopher has written, and must be an expert
(
epistemôn
) of Aristotle’s customary use of
language (
sunêtheia
). His judgement must be impartial
(
adekaston
), so that he may neither, out of misplaced zeal,
seek to prove something well said to be unsatisfactory, nor, if some
point should require attention, should he obstinately persist in
trying to demonstrate that [Aristotle] is always and everywhere
infallible, as if he had enrolled himself in the Philosopher’s
school. [The good exegete] must, I believe, not convict the
philosophers of discordance (
diaphônia
) by looking only
at the letter (
lexis
) of what [Aristotle] says against Plato;
but he must look towards the spirit (
nous
), and track down
(
anikhneuein
) the harmony (
sumphônia
) which
reigns between them on the majority of points. (Simplicius,
In
Cat.
7.23–32, translated by M. Chase, slightly
modified)
This is certainly one of the most interesting passages for those
trying to understand the Simplicius’ view of the role of the
commentator. The passage can, with caution, be considered a kind of
self-portrait of the Neoplatonic commentator at work, a glimpse into
his workshop, as it were. The good commentator must (1) be able to
understand and follow Aristotle’s arguments (“greatness of
intellect”). He must (2) have read all of Aristotle’s
works and must know his terminology and ways of expressing himself
(“customary use of language”). This is required in order
to explain “Aristotle by means of Aristotle” (see
[Pseudo-?]Simplicius,
In de Anima
1.14–15, and
Elias/David,
In Cat.
123.7–11) and show that he does
not contradict himself. The good commentator must also (3) be
impartial, that is, not openly polemical against Aristotle and merely
scoring points, but at the same time not an uncritical enthusiast.
Simplicius illustrates this elsewhere with his well-known saying,
“
amicus Plato vel Aristoteles, sed magis amica
veritas
” (“Plato or Aristotle are dear to me, but
much dearer is the truth”; see Tarán 1984 and
In
Cael.
301.19–21 [about Alexander]). In other words, it is
certainly legitimate to criticise Aristotle. But things are different
with respect to Plato, because it seems that Simplicius never
criticised him. Finally, the good commentator must (4) strive for
harmony in most cases, by means of a distinction between the
superficial sense of a text (
lexis
) and its true or deeper
meaning (
nous
).
In order to forge a clearer profile of the commentator, it will be
useful to compare him to other Aristotelian commentators, such as
Alexander of Aphrodisias, Iamblichus, David, and Elias. The
Neoplatonists certainly did not consider Alexander to be an impartial
commentator on Aristotle. Rather, Simplicius often treats him as
someone who stands in firm opposition to the harmony of Plato and
Aristotle. As good a text as any to characterise Alexander’s
attitude towards Aristotle can be found in the opening words of his
De anima
:
Just as I have great reverence for Aristotle’s works on other
subjects, since I find more truth in the views passed down from him
than in what others have claimed, I regard what he states in his
theory of the soul in the same way as well. I will therefore have
fulfilled my aim if I can set out his claims about the soul as clearly
as possible and offer suitable arguments to show how each of them is
well formulated. (Alexander,
De anima
2.4–9 [Bruns],
translated by V. Caston)
On the other hand, the Neoplatonists viewed Iamblichus as someone who
brought Plato and Aristotle too close together. A text from Philoponus
points to interpreters who argued that the two even agreed on the
nature of universals:
Thus, also Proclus plainly and openly agrees with us about the
difference of the two philosophers [sc. as regards the status of
universals], or rather he has demonstrated it from the words/writings
of Aristotle himself. From this one can only wonder about the
overshooting amount of shamelessness among those who try to show that
Aristotle and Plato did agree also in this point. (Philoponus,
De
aeternitate mundi
32.8–13 [Rabe], trans. by author)
It is very likely that Iamblichus was among these interpreters. We
know from elsewhere that he even saw agreement regarding the theory of
Forms (Elias/David,
In Cat.
123.1–3). Along the same
lines, Simplicius seems to have reconciled Aristotle’s
comparison of the soul with an empty writing tablet (
De anima
III 4, 429b31–430a2) and Plato’s theory of innate
knowledge (de Haas 2000, 169–170).
Was Simplicius impartial towards Plato? This is insisted upon, for
instance, by Elias/David (
In Cat.
122.27–32), but not,
at least not explicitly, by Simplicius. As noted above, Simplicius is
prepared to criticise Aristotle time and again (for instance, in his
digression on place [
topos
]), but he never seems to criticise
Plato. For Simplicius, Plato is the one who brought the truth to
light, the explainer or interpreter of the truth (
ho tês
alêtheias exêgêtês
,
In Cael.
131.1), but Aristotle is never granted such an honorary title (cf.
Syrianus’ and Proclus’ distinction between a “divine
Plato”and a (merely) “daimonic/semi-divine
Aristotle”). Therefore, one may surmise that Plato was not
subject to the impartiality requirement, since he was, compared to all
other representatives of the ancient philosophical tradition (
hoi
palaioi
), somehow closest to the truth.
3. The Decisive Role of Alexander of Aphrodisias
If one were to name a single commentator apart from Simplicius’
Neoplatonic sources (esp. Porphyry and Iamblichus) who mostly strongly
shaped his commentaries, it would undoubtedly be Alexander of
Aphrodisias (around 200 CE):
[It is] profitable for those who choose to understand and explain
Aristotle’s thought by way of Alexander’s commentaries, to
examine what he said. (Simplicius,
In Cael.
297.8–10,
translated by J. Hankinson)
Baltussen used this telling quotation to preface the chapter on
Alexander of Aphrodisias in his monograph on Simplicius (2008: 107).
It illustrates rather well that Simplicius by no means blindly
followed “the commentator” (
ho
exêgêtês
), as he calls him (
In Phys.
1170.2,
In Cael.
121.12 and 700.9), but was eager to
carefully examine what Alexander had to say. It is known, for
instance, that Simplicius had direct access to Alexander’s
commentaries on the
Physics
, the
Heavens
, and the
Categories
. All of these are now lost, but a good deal can be
reconstructed based on Simplicius’ testimony (see the overview
in Kupreeva [2018: 387-388 and 443]). It can even be said without exaggeration that
large parts of Simplicius’ oeuvre are, in fact, extended
conversations with “Aristotle’s most famous exegete”
(Baltussen 2016: 1). While Simplicius owes much to Alexander, his
attitude towards him is ambiguous and comparable to how Syrianus deals
with Alexander’s
Commentary on the Metaphysics
.
Syrianus focuses especially on those passages where Aristotle attacks
Pythagorean-Platonic metaphysics (esp. in books 13 and 14 of the
Metaphysics
), but in other cases, Alexander’s comments
suffice (O’Meara & Dillon 2008: 5). In other words,
Alexander’s comments generally have great value; he is the more
genuine (
gnêsiôteros
) commentator on Aristotle
(
In Phys.
80.15–16), especially as far as the
Peripatetic tradition is concerned. Moreover, while Aristotle is the
most genuine disciple of Plato (
gnêsiôtatos
),
Alexander is the “most careful of Aristotle’s
partisans” (
epimelestatos spoudastês
,
In
Cael.
378.20–22, borrowing the translation from
Mueller).
On the other hand, Alexander of Aphrodisias can also be a stumbling
block for integrating Aristotle into the Platonic tradition. This is
reflected in several passages where Simplicius remarks on
Alexander’s way of explaining Aristotle and, more specifically,
his attitude towards Plato. For while Simplicius as a rule tries to
explain away critical remarks that Aristotle aimed at his teacher, for
instance, via the distinction between the superficial meaning of a
text (
lexis
,
to phainomenon
) and its real purpose
(
dianoia
,
nous
), Alexander always sides with
Aristotle against Plato:
It is my opinion that Alexander of Aphrodisias obviously understands
the words of Aristotle well on other occasions—and does so
better than the other Peripatetics, but, in the case of the things
which Aristotle says concerning Plato, he does not seem to me to bear
in mind that Aristotle’s counter-arguments are directed at the
surface import of Plato’s statements (
pros to
phainomenon
). But, contesting Plato frivolously
(
kakoscholôs
) in a way, he tries not only, as Aristotle
also does, to refute the surface import of what Plato says, taking
simpler <people> into consideration, but he also attacks the
ideas (
tas ennoias
) of the divine Plato and tries to draw
consequences from what Plato says, frequently not even attending to
the surface import.
Consequently I, setting out the truth, which is dear to god and to
Aristotle, will here try to do a careful investigation, putting
forward the things which Alexander says are the opinions of Plato
about the motion of the soul. I do this because of those who deal with
his words in a more superficial way and dare to take from them in a
way which is hostile to the views of Plato, which is the same as to
say hostile to the opinions of Aristotle and to divine truth.
(Simplicius,
In Cael.
377.20–34, translated by I.
Mueller)
But Alexander von Aphrodisias does not understand Plato’s
doctrines as Aristotle understood them, nor does he accept that their
views are in agreement (
sumphônia
) […].
(Simplicius,
In Cael.
297.1–4, translated by R. J.
Hankinson)
I have said these things against Alexander for, while I respect the
man and wish him well, I think that honouring the truth the more is
dear to him too. (Simplicius,
In Cael.
301.19–21,
translated by R. J. Hankinson)
But Alexander, although he is accustomed to drag in Plato even where
he is quite irrelevant, for some reason has here forgotten Plato
instead. (Simplicius,
In Phys.
560.11–13, translated by
J. O. Urmson)
4. How to Comment on Aristotle as a Neoplatonist?
The Neoplatonic commentaries of late Antiquity represent rather
sophisticated readings of Plato and Aristotle, integrating a rich
prehistory of exegesis and philosophical debate, but also structured
according to certain well-defined rules and methods. Since Simplicius
comes almost at the end of this tradition, his commentaries are also a
repository from which such constituent parts of Platonic exegetical
practices can be reconstructed. Generally speaking, both ancient and
medieval commentators share a nondevelopmentalist approach to their
authors and treat single works as part of a greater philosophical
whole or system. Simplicius’ main aim is to clarify the
Aristotelian text, explain Aristotle by means of his own writings, and
demonstrate the harmony of Plato, Aristotle and older pre-Socratic
traditions.
Several elements are characteristic of Simplicius’ commentaries.
All are lemmatised, that is, Aristotle’s (or Epictetus’)
text is divided into smaller sections of text which are then commented
upon, and the commentaries are introduced with prologues of varying
lengths (see below for more details). The comments on a single lemma
are sometimes subdivided into two sections, one which mainly comments
on the philosophical content (
theôria
) and one which
comments on single expressions or words (
lexis
). Such a
distinction goes back to Proclus (Festugière 1963 [1971]).
Since the commentaries are probably not written for teaching purposes
(see
§1
),
 they are not structured according to “lessons”
(
praxeis
), as was the usual practice in the Alexandrian
school after Ammonius. Digressions or autonomous essays that interrupt
the running commentary are also characteristic of Simplicius (see
Golitsis 2008a and
§2.3
in the supplement “The Commentaries of Simplicius”).
 Like Aristotle, Simplicius frequently integrates longer doxographies.
At times, he approaches philosophical issues through the method of
“difficulties and solutions” (
aporiai kai
luseis
), which can frequently be found in Damascius,
Simplicius’ teacher, and ultimately goes back to Aristotle (cf.
Metaphysics
Beta, with its long list of
aporiai
).
From Iamblichus, Simplicius borrows the policy that each of
Plato’s and Aristotle’s works should be explained by first
establishing its main, overarching topics (
skopos
) which hold
all the parts together:
For the goal (
skopos
), once correctly identified, defines and
rectifies our thought (
dianoia
), so that we are not vainly
transported about in every direction, but refer everything to it.
(Simplicius,
In Cat.
8.13–15, translated by Michael
Chase)
A common practice among later Neoplatonists was to preface their
commentaries with a series of questions or preliminary points
(
kephalaia
) that should be settled before embarking on the
exegesis proper (Hadot & Hoffmann 1990: 21–160; Hoffmann
1998; Mansfeld 1994; for an excellent (English) summary see Hoffmann
2006: 607–613). The form that these
prolegomena
, as
they were called, take in Simplicius was introduced by the
Neoplatonist Proclus (Elias/David,
In Cat.
107.24–26).
In the case of Aristotle’s
Categories
, for instance, we
find not only prolegomena suited for this very text (in seven points),
but also a general introduction to Aristotle’s philosophy (in
ten points; for a useful overview see Hoffmann 2006: 607–613).
This is because the
Categories
was the first of
Aristotle’s texts to be read in the Neoplatonic school:
Since the Categories is the first book of Aristotle’s which we
encounter, and Aristotle’s school—the so-called
Peripatetic—is one of the schools of philosophy, we ought first
to say how and in how many ways the philosophical schools received
their appellations. Secondly, what is the division of the Aristotelian
writings, so that the class to which we shall assign the present work
shall be clear. Third, whence should one begin [the study of]
Aristotle’s writings? Fourth, what is the goal of
Aristotle’s philosophy? Fifth, which things lead us towards this
goal? Sixth, what is the form of the Aristotelian writings? Seventh,
why did the Philosopher practise obscurity? Eighth, what must the
exegete of accounts (
logoi
) such as these be like? Ninth,
what kind of student should be accepted? Tenth, in the case of each
Aristotelian treatise, how many main points (
kephalaia
)
should be taken up, which are they, and for what reason? (Simplicius,
In Cat.
3.18–29, translated by M. Chase)
Finally, the tenth of the matters set forth was: how many, and of what
kind, are the preliminary points (
kephalaia
) we must
articulate prior to the study of each Aristotelian treatise. They are
the following: the goal (
skopos
), the usefulness (
to
chrêsimon
), the reason for the title (
aitia
epigraphês
), its place in the order of reading (
taxis
anagnôseôs
), whether the book is a genuine work of
the Philosopher (
gnêsion
), its division into chapters
(
eis kephalaia dihairesis
). It may also not be inappropriate
to inquire under what part of his philosophy (
meros tês
philosophias
) the work is placed. (Simplicius,
In Cat.
8.9–13, translated by M. Chase)
Such an introductory scheme could be modified according to the
specific needs and exigencies of a text, so that there is not always a
discussion of all preliminary points:
It is to be noted, however, that all these things do not always
require articulation, for often, the usefulness becomes clear at the
same time as the goal, while the title is obvious to everyone, as [in
the case of] the
On the Soul
. Authenticity, for its part,
does not need to be established in every case, but in general only
when there is some starting-point for controversy. (Simplicius,
In
Cat.
8.31–9.3, translated by M. Chase)
5. The Commentary as Spiritual Exercise
I offer these things as a hymn to You, Lord (
despota
),
Creator (
dêmiourgos
) of the whole cosmos and of the
simple bodies in it, and to those who have been made by You, desiring
to behold the greatness of Your works and proclaim it to the worthy so
that, thinking nothing mean or merely human about You, we might kneel
down to You because of the superiority which You have over all the
things created by You. (Simplicius,
In Cael.
731.25–29,
translated by I. Mueller)
Simplicius’
Commentary on the Heavens
ends with a
prayer to the demiurge. In this prayer, the whole work is termed a
“hymn” (
humnos
) to the creator god. Several
recent studies have pointed out that the later Neoplatonists
considered theology and ritual (theurgy) an integral part of their
philosophy. For instance, Proclus composed several hymns and begins
his
Commentary on the Parmenides
with a long prayer. Both he
and his teacher Syrianus were eager to show that Plato was in harmony
with most ancient religious traditions such as the Orphics, the
Pythagoreans and the Chaldaean Oracles. Simplicius’ extant
commentaries all end with a prayer, the only exception being the
Commentary on the De anima
, where we find a small prayer at
the beginning of the work:
And now, under the Guide who is the cause of all souls and all
reasoning, let us start upon the projected work. (Simplicius,
In
de Anima
1.3–21, translated by J. O. Urmson, slightly
modified)
Surprisingly, and unexpectedly for readers familiar with
Aristotle’s
Physics
and
De caelo
, which are
both rather technical in character, Simplicius’ comments time
and again betray a deeply religious or spiritual mindset. In the
tradition of Athenian Neoplatonism, where religious and ritual
elements were crucial ingredients of philosophy, Simplicius’
Platonisation of Aristotle, as it were, also entails a
spiritualisation of Aristotle’s works.
This is where the ultimate usefulness (
chrêsimon
) of
Simplicius’ writings is located. Philippe Hoffmann has
demonstrated this admirably:
The example of Simplicius’s
Commentary on Aristotle’s
Physics
is emblematic of the connection between learned exegesis
and religion: the “usefulness” of physics, Simplicius
explains, is to provoke the awakening in souls of the anagogical triad
of Love, Truth, and Faith (to which is added a fourth term, Hope); and
the successive reading of the
Physics
and the
De
Caelo
leads the soul of the philosopher-exegete and those of his
audience (or of his readers) to a “union”
(
henôsis
), through Faith and the “vital
sympathy” correlative with it, with the divine Heaven and with
the demiurgic intellect that produces the World. (Hoffmann 2006:
599–600)
Within this text is a motif that may be called the ultimate goal
(
telos
) of all ancient philosophical schools, but especially
of the Platonic tradition, to wit, “assimilation to god” (Plato,
Theaetetus
176b–c, trans. by author).
The average Aristotle
scholar today might find this far-fetched, to say the least. However,
neither of Simplicius’ commentaries on natural philosophy was by
any means a religious manifesto. Rather, they are both crammed with
technical details and a vast knowledge of texts and philosophical
problems. But to ignore this religious dimension would do injustice to
Simplicius’ general approach to philosophy and exegesis, for in
late Antiquity, philosophy was considered a “way of life”
(P. Hadot 1995) and always related
to ethics and the ultimate goal of human life, i.e., purification,
ascent, and salvation/deification of the soul:
If we take Simplicius at his word that the ‘study of physics
[…] arouses us to marvel and magnify the maker of the cosmos',
his commentaries on
Physics
and
On the Heavens
are
indeed also a form of worship in which his ingenuity and respect for
the established tradition contribute to the general effort of
clarifying the interpreters of nature (and the interpreters of the
interpreters). In trying to defend the Platonist point of view in
contradistinction to the Christian outlook he uses polemic to persuade
and refute, the comprehensive exegesis to clarify and proselytise. His
commentaries thus became one very elaborate protreptic and guide to
Aristotle's works. (Baltussen 2008: 195)
6. The Harmony of Plato and Aristotle and Christian Threads
[The good exegete] must, I believe, not convict the philosophers of
discordance (
diaphônia
) by looking only at the letter
(
lexis
) of what [Aristotle] says against Plato; but he must
look towards the spirit (
nous
), and track down
(
anikhneuein
) the harmony (
sumphônia
) which
reigns between them on the majority of points. (Simplicius,
In
Cat.
7.29–32, translated by M. Chase)
This programmatic statement from the introductory section to the
Commentary on the Categories
shows that the harmony of Plato
and Aristotle was one of Simplicius’ top priorities as a
commentator. As mentioned earlier, the ancient notion of harmony
(
sumphônia
) did not entail a strict identity of
philosophical views. Rather, it referred to positions that are
reconcilable, compatible, or even complementary:
The text of the two philosophers can be in accord by being
complementary in a unified system, which is quite different from their
being in accord as to the very ideas they contain. (Golitsis 2018:
72)
Neoplatonists frequently characterised Aristotle as the secretary of
nature, as it were, while Plato was the metaphysician par excellence
(cf. Raphael’s “The School of Athens”). Each had his
own peculiar domain and his peculiar philosophical attitude, but one
could nevertheless speak of a harmony between the two approaches:
[Aristotle] always refuses to deviate from nature; on the contrary, he
considers even things which are above nature according to their
relation to nature, just as, by contrast, the divine Plato, according
to Pythagorean usage, examines even natural things insofar as they
participate in the things above nature. (Simplicius,
In Cat.
6.27–30, translated by M. Chase)
One ought to know that Aristotle is always doing natural philosophy
when he does theology, while Plato is always doing theology when he
does natural philosophy. (Elias/David,
In Cat.
120.30–121.4)
However, I think that one should also attend to the purpose
(
skopos
) as well as at the words and recognise that the
difference (
diaphora
) between the two philosophers on these
questions is not about things (
pragmata
) but about words:
Plato rejects the ordinary use of words (
sunêtheia
) in
the name of precision, but Aristotle makes use of the ordinary use of
words on the grounds that the truth is not at all harmed by this.
(Simplicius,
In Cael.
69.11–15, translated by I.
Mueller)
Here, therefore, the difference (
diaphora
) between the
philosophers is not over a reality (
pragma
), but over a name
(
onoma
), as it is in most cases. I think the reason often is
that Aristotle wishes to preserve linguistic usage and carries out his
arguments on the basis of what is evident to the senses, while Plato
often scorns them and readily resorts to intellective theories.
(Simplicius,
In Phys.
1249.12–17, translated by I.
Bodnár, M. Chase, and M. Share; cf. (Pseudo-?)Simplicius,
In de Anima
28.12–13)
Certainly, one may wonder whether such a program does justice to
either Plato or Aristotle, although this issue is not relevant to the
present discussion of Simplicius. Within the framework of Late
Neoplatonism, it seems advisable to distinguish Simplicius from
Syrianus and Proclus, since both of the latter are much more explicit
and polemical when it comes to reprimanding Aristotle for his
criticism of Plato. On the other hand, while it is true that
Simplicius makes a great effort to reconcile the two philosophers,
such a rapprochement could also be considered a Platonisation of
Aristotle and a stealthy neutralisation of his at times anti-Platonic
line of reasoning.
Be that as it may, it is nevertheless clear that there is a rich
pedigree in the history of the Platonic tradition regarding
harmonisation. Simplicius continues and extends a program that was
inaugurated by his teacher Ammonius, and also before him by Porphyry,
and it was afterwards continued in Alexandria by Hierocles and
Olympiodorus, more or less along the same lines as Simplicius.
Karamanolis (2018: 36) argues convincingly that Porphyry (and before
him some Middle Platonists) had already considered Aristotle a crucial
part of the Platonic tradition:
[…] Porphyry wrote commentaries on works of Aristotle because
he found these works to represent an elaboration on, and a development
of, Plato’s philosophy. […] What Porphyry does deny is
that Aristotle contradicts the essence of Plato’s philosophical
views when he articulates theories that are not in Plato, since these
may be inspired from Plato or continue in some way Plato’s
thinking on a given issue.
Scholars have remarked that Simplicius’ eagerness to harmonise
Plato and Aristotle should be seen in the context of the
Neoplatonist’s anti-Christian attitude and especially his
polemics against the Christian Platonist John Philoponus (Hoffmann
2014: 286). After Christianity became the official state religion (in
380 CE), it was ever more difficult for pagan philosophers to teach
and practice their cultic rituals. This development culminated in the
famous edict of 529, commonly referred to as the closing of the
Platonic Academy (see
§1
).
 One of the main criticisms, made as early as the first Christian
apologist Tertullian, was that Greek philosophers and their schools
would constantly contradict each other, so that it was impossible to
speak of a unified intellectual tradition or heritage. In this
respect, John Philoponus was particularly dangerous in criticising the
Hellenic tradition from within, and with an excellent knowledge of all
of the relevant texts. If all of this weren’t bad enough, the
Christian Platonist from Alexandria openly countered efforts toward
harmonisation. Being a fervent champion of the creation of the world
in time (according to the Christian creed), Philoponus argues that one
of the most common arguments of the harmonisers—that Aristotle
would only criticise the apparent meaning of Plato’s
words—is not valid. He even refers to it as a fiction
(
muthos
), adding that if it were true, Aristotle would have
said so explicitly:
From these passages we can most certainly see that Aristotle’s
refutations of Plato are not directed at people who have wrongly
understood Plato, which is a fiction created by some more recent
commentators out of embarrassment at the disagreement between the
<two> philosophers, but rather constitute a rebuttal of the
notions of Plato himself. For, if Aristotle had not been attacking
Plato’s own doctrine of the Forms but, as these commentators
claim, that of people who have misunderstood him, he would have
specified precisely this at the outset and not have refuted the
doctrine of the Forms generally and without qualification.
(Philoponus,
De aet. Mundi
29.2–13, translated by P.
Golitsis 2018: 73)
Simplicius’ polemics with Philoponus in his commentaries on the
Physics
and
De Caelo
will be examined in more detail
below.
Ammonius, pupil of Proclus was also an important predecessor for
Simplicius. Ammonius taught in Alexandria (around the second half of
the fifth century) and famously argued that Aristotle’s Unmoved
Mover is both a final and an efficient cause (Simplicius,
In
Cael.
271.13–21 and
In Phys.
1360.24–1363.24). Such a reading of Aristotle, which Proclus
still firmly opposes (
In Parm
. IV 842.20–27 [Steel],
where he calls the Unmoved Mover
agonos
, i.e., not productive
or infertile; see also Tempelis 1998: 134 n. 609), was an important
step in combining the demiurge in Plato’s
Timaeus
with
Aristotle’s self-thinking intellect (
Metaphysics
Lambda
6–7). Simplicius welcomes Ammonius’ innovation and, not
surprisingly, refers to him with great approval (see
In Phys.
1362.11–16 and Golitsis 2017a).
But it should not be forgotten that there were also other threads to
Simplicius’ approach of harmonising the Hellenic tradition and
especially of integrating Aristotle. At
In Cael.
297.1–6, he mentions some interpreters (
tines
) who
betrayed a hostile attitude towards Aristotle. It is likely that he
mainly had Syrianus and Proclus in mind. Simplicius had to deal with
such criticism with much more delicacy than the criticism coming from
Philoponus. There is a telling passage in
In Cael.
640.20–31, where Simplicius explains that Proclus has refuted
Aristotle’s criticism of Plato in the
De caelo
in a
special monograph (now lost; see Steel 2005 and Luna, Segonds, and
Endress 2012: 1591–1596) in order to immediately remark that the
criticism was only apparent.
What are the different strategies Simplicius uses to harmonise Plato
and Aristotle or to integrate the Presocratics and even earlier
traditions (Chaldeans, Orphics) into the Platonic tradition? In
Platonic Theology
I 4, Proclus discusses at length an
exegetical device that seems to be comparable to the doctrine of the
“four senses of scripture” (
quattuor sensus sacrae
scripturae
), well known from biblical exegesis. According to
Proclus, different hermeneutical methods may be applied to different
texts, depending on the mode of their composition. From the
perspective of the Neoplatonists, different authors or even schools of
thought had different ways of expressing themselves; this applied
mainly to traditions that were active or alleged to be active before
Socrates and Plato: the Chaldeans, the Orphics, Homer (and Hesiod),
the Presocratics (esp. Parmenides and Pythagoras, including the
Pseudo-Pythagorean tradition)—but also to Plato and Aristotle.
Texts could be written “in riddles”, “as
myths”, “in symbols”, or “in images”,
and they could be “inspired” or “dialectical”.
At times, this entailed that these texts needed to be translated or
decoded in order to serve in philosophical debates. It goes without
saying that such presuppositions also granted a certain kind of
exegetical freedom to the interpreters. Plato himself, Proclus
explains, betrays at least four modes of expressing himself in
different dialogues, while Aristotle was often considered to
intentionally write in an obscure way for members of his school.
Moreover, while Plato, according to Simplicius, “rejects the
ordinary use of words in the name of precision”, Aristotle
“makes use of the ordinary use” (Simplicius,
In
Cael.
69.11–15).
It is against this background that Simplicius’ attempt to
harmonise the Greek tradition should be interpreted. Compared to
Proclus, Simplicius’ approach is less complex, and it is, in
fact, rather similar in principle. Regarding the Presocratics,
Simplicius remarks that they frequently speak in riddles
(
ainigmatôdôs
) and that Aristotle’s
criticism of them is merely directed against their apparent meaning.
What is more, we should keep in mind that they wrote before the
methods of philosophical discourse and formal logic were firmly
established by Plato and Aristotle:
But since we will hear Aristotle too refuting the opinions of earlier
philosophers, and before Aristotle Plato seems to do this, and before
both of them Parmenides and Xenophanes, it should be known that these
people, being concerned for those who listen more superficially,
refuted the apparent absurdity (
to phainomenon atopon
) in
their accounts, since the ancients were accustomed to express their
doctrines in riddles (
ainigmatôdôs
). (Simplicius,
In Phys.
36.25–31, translated by R. Barney and S.
Menn)
[…] Eudemus bears witness to this when he says: ‘Someone
might be amazed at Parmenides for following these untrustworthy
arguments and being deceived by things of this kind, but these matters
had not yet then been clarified. For neither did anyone refer to
“[being spoken of] in many ways” but Plato was the first
to introduce “in two ways”, nor [did anyone speak of] the
“in itself” or “the accidental”; and it seems
that he [i.e., Parmenides] was indeed misled by these points. These
have been studied through the arguments and counter arguments, and the
syllogistic <figure>. For there was no agreement unless it was
seen to be necessary. But our predecessors made claims without proof.
(Simplicius,
In Phys.
120.6–12, translated by P. Huby
and C. C. W. Taylor)
Simplicius uses the same pattern of argument regarding
Aristotle’s criticism of Plato: Aristotle argues merely against
the apparent meaning of Plato’s words (see, for instance,
In
Cael.
352.27–28, 296.6–8 and 26–30, 377.20
ff.). Pantelis Golitsis has rightly pointed out that such criticism had
a “preventive” and “pedagogical” function for
ordinary, more superficial, and inexperienced readers who were prone
to misunderstand Plato. This goes back, in part, to the Neoplatonist
Syrianus (Golitsis 2018: 94). For instance, Golitsis points to
In
Phys.
821.27–29, where Simplicius explains that
“Aristotle philosophised in a way which is more suited to the
majority of people and because he was aware of their misunderstandings
[…]” (translated by J. O. Urmson and P. Golitsis).
Simplicius’ arguments are, as previously noted, indebted to
Ammonius. Olympiodorus, Ammonius’ pupil in Alexandria, shows a
strategy similar to Simplicius’ strategy. The only difference
may be that, as already noted, Simplicius never seems to disagree with
Plato. Was the Alexandrian or the Ammonian school more liberal in this
respect? Once again, it is interesting to compare Simplicius with
Olympiodorus:
Olympiodorus follows Ammonius in emphasizing the harmony between
Aristotle and his master […]. He calls him a true disciple of
Plato (
In Alc
. 5.29–32). Whenever possible he resolves
apparent contradictions and says that in the rare instances where
Aristotle diverges from Plato he is still indebted to him (
In
Gorg
. 41.9, 214.13–215.11). Olympiodorus is not blind to
the divergences, and in those cases he usually, though not always,
agrees with Plato. (Opsomer 2010: 707)
7. Simplicius’ Legacy
In the Middle Ages and after, Simplicius was read by a wide range of
authors, but to date no systematic study of his legacy has been
published. This final section presents only a limited selection of
evidence for his legacy. In the Latin West, the Dominican friar
William of Moerbeke (1215–1286) translated some of
Simplicius’ commentaries into Latin. This made them accessible
to readers such as Thomas Aquinas, Henry of Ghent, Duns Scotus, and
many others. Moerbeke finished translating the
Commentary on the
Categories
in 1266 (Chase 2008: 12–17 and 20–24). He
also translated a small part of the
Commentary on the De
Caelo
, the so-called
fragmentum Toletanum
, followed by a
full translation of the commentary in 1271 (see Bossier 1987). In
addition, there is a partial translation by Robert Grosseteste that is
older then the one by Moerbeke, but it is difficult to determine who
actually made use of it.
Regarding Moerbeke’s influence on Thomas, the latter seems to
have followed Simplicius in the way he conceives the history of
philosophy and, more specifically, the relation between Plato and
Aristotle (see Hankey 2002):
The diversity of these two positions stems from this, that some, in
order to seek the truth about the nature of things, have proceeded
from intelligible reasons, and this was the particular characteristic
of the Platonists. Some, however, have proceeded from sensible things,
and this was the particular characteristic of the philosophy of
Aristotle, as Simplicius says in his commentary
Upon the
Categories
. (Thomas Aquinas,
De Spiritualibus creaturis
3.40.275–282, as quoted in Hankey 2002: n. 46)
Moreover, Thomas must have considered Simplicius a rich source of
information about ancient philosophers and their doctrines and
especially about the Peripatetic tradition. Bossier (1987) and others
have suggested that Thomas might have used material from the
previously mentioned
fragmentum Toletanum
in his
Commentary on Aristotle’s Metaphysics
(XII 8, on
concentric spheres and their different movers). There is no evidence
of an early Latin translation of the other commentaries, with the
possible exception of a small part of the
Commentary on the
Physics
, which also goes back to Robert Grosseteste (Mansion
1956: 94).
The Arabic tradition is another important source of information about
Simplicius (for a concise summary, see Goulet & Coda 2016:
384–394; see also Vallat 2014a and 2014b and Gätje 1982).
As in the Latin tradition, the
Commentaries
on the
Categories
and the
De anima
seem to have primarily
been read by scholars (in both Arabic and Syriac). However, there also
appears to be some evidence for a lost
Commentary on the First
Book of Euclid
(Goulet & Coda 2016: 390–394; I. Hadot
2014, 39–53; R. Rashed 2005). Before Simplicius, Proclus had
already commented on Euclid. Proclus’ commentary still exists,
and so there is a question regarding Simplicius’ motivation for
writing a second commentary, and it may be that Simplicius’
commentary was simply an augmented and revised version of
Proclus’ commentary. Philosophers in the Arabic tradition, like
those in the Latin tradition, also used Simplicius to defend the
harmony of Plato and Aristotle.
The Byzantine tradition is primarily relevant for the textual
transmission of Simplicius’ works. From the little that is
known, Byzantine scholars seem to have had a special interest in the
Commentary on the Physics
. One of the most important
manuscripts conserving this commentary (Mosquensis Muz. 3649), not
used by Hermann Diels in his CAG edition, was copied by the Byzantine
princess Theodora Palaiologina Rhaulaina (ca. 1240–1300; see
Harlfinger 1987). Simplicius’
Commentary on the Physics
was used by Michael Psellus, Nicophorus Blemmydes (in his
Isagogical Epitome
; Golitsis 2007), Georgios Pachymeres (in
his own
Commentary on the Physics
, traditionally attributed
to Psellus; Golitsis 2008b), Georgios Gemistius-Plethon, Georgios
Scholarius, and Theodorus of Gaza. Since there was a lively debate
among Byzantine philosophers on the relation between Plato and
Aristotle, it is very likely that Simplicius had an impact in this
respect.
Interest in the
Commentary on the De anima
can also be traced
in the Renaissance, for instance, the attention paid to
(Pseudo-?)Simplicius’ reading of
De anima
III 5 as
regarding the human intellect only, and also his explanation of the
key notion of
entelecheia
and his relation to Averroes’
psychology (Nardi 1951; Salatowsky 2006; Blackwell 2011). Moreover,
Renaissance philosophers, like scholars in Byzantium and the Latin
West, thought much about the relation between Plato and Aristotle,
with some sharing Simplicius’ preference for harmony or
concordism and others opposing it. Thus, for example, Thomas
Aquinas’ view on the harmony of Plato and Aristotle was partly
inspired by passages from Simplicius (in William of Moerbeke’s
Latin translation). Other than in the Middle Ages, we also find a
growing interest in his
Commentary on Epictetus’
Handbook
from the fifteenth century onwards, especially among
Humanists (P. Hadot 1987). Last, but not least, in his
Lectures on
the History of Philosophy
, G. W. F. Hegel (1770–1831) calls
Simplicius “the most learned and acute of the Greek commentators
on Aristotle” (“
der gelehrteste und scharfsinnigste
der griechischen Kommentatoren des Aristoteles
”) and
asserts that “we owe him much” (“
wir verdanken
ihm Verdienstliches
”).
Although much more could be said here about Simplicius’ legacy,
suffice it to say the following. As mentioned in the introduction, his
Commentary on the Physics
was the basis for Diels’
fundamental studies on the Greek doxographers (
Doxographi
graeci
) and the fragments of the Presocratic philosophers
(
Fragmente der Vorsokratiker
). The reconstruction of the
Peripatetic tradition also depends to a large extent on Simplicius
(Falcon 2017 and Baltussen 2016). This is especially obvious in 
the work of Alexander of Aphrodisias, where substantial parts of lost
commentaries can be retrieved from Simplicius’ works (M. Rashed
2011), but also in the case of less well-known figures such as Boethos
of Sidon (Chiaradonna & Rashed forthcoming). Compared to Hermann
Diels and others, we now have a much better grasp of how Simplicius
handled his sources and how he portrayed the historical development of
Greek philosophy up to his time. Several recent studies have also
provided a clearer profile of Simplicius’ own philosophical
agenda. Nevertheless, considerable parts of his commentaries are still
relatively unexplored, and it now seems to be a good time for
contemporary scholars to rediscover the Neoplatonist as an inspiring
late-ancient colleague in the joint venture of coming to terms with
Aristotle.
Bibliography
List of abbreviations
[
In Cael.
]
In Aristotelis De Caelo commentaria
,
Johann Ludwig Heiberg
 (ed.)—
Commentary on Aristotle’s On the Heavens
[
In Cat.
]
In Aristotelis Categorias commentaria
,
Carolus Kalbfleisch
 (ed.)—
Commentary on Aristotle’s Categories
[
In de Anima
]
In libros Aristotelis de Anima
commentaria
, Michael Hayduck
 (ed.)—
Commentary on Aristotle’s De Anima
[
In Epict.
]
Commentaria In Epicteti
Encheiridion
, Ilsetraut Hadot
 (ed.)—
Commentary on Epictetus’ Handbook
[the commentary is quoted here according to the number of the lemmata
(including the
praefatio
and the
epilogus
) and the
pages and line numbers of Hadot’s
editio maior
(1996);
the English translation by Brennan and Brittain 2002, only mentions
the page numbers of Hadot’s edition and otherwise provides
references to Dübner’s edition from 1840. In principle, it
would suffice to quote Hadot’s edition according to the lemmata
and line number, but then it would be impossible to find the
corresponding passage in the English translation.]
[
In Phys.
]
In Aristotelis Physicorum libros quattuor
priores/posteriores
, Hermann Diels
 (ed.)—
Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics
Introductions, monographs, and collected volumes
Baltussen, Han, 2008,
Philosophy and Exegesis in Simplicius:

The Methodology of a Commentator
, London: Duckworth.
–––, 2010, “Simplicius of Cilicia”,

in
The Cambridge History of Philosophy in Late Antiquity
,
Volume 2, Lloyd P. Gerson (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University

Press, pp. 711–732. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521194846.010
–––, 2018, “§162. Simplikios”,

in
Die Philosophie der Antike
, Christoph Riedweg, Christoph

Horn, and Dietmar Wyrwa (eds.), (Band 5: Philosophie der Kaiserzeit

und der Spätantike) (=
Grundriss der Geschichte der

Philosophie: Die Philosophie der Antike.
Band 5/3), Basel:
Schwabe, pp. 2060–2084.
Goulet, Richard and Elisa Coda, 2016, “Simplicius de

Cilicie”, in
Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques
(Volume VI: De Sabinillus à Tyrsénos), Paris: CNRS
Éditions, pp. 341–394.
Hadot, Ilsetraut, 1987,
Simplicius, sa vie, son œuvre,

sa survie: actes du colloque international de Paris 28 Sept. –
1er Oct. 1985
, (Peripatoi, 15), Berlin: de Gruyter.
–––, 1990, “The Life and Works of

Simplicius in Greek and Arabic Sources”, in
Aristotle
Transformed: The Ancient Commentators and their Influence
,
Richard Sorabji (ed.), Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, pp.
275–304.
–––, 2014,
Le néoplatonicien

Simplicius à la lumière des recherches contemporaines:

Un bilan critique
, St. Augustin: Academia Verlag.
Hadot, Ilsetraut and Pierre Hadot, 2004,
Apprendre à

philosopher dans l’Antiquité: L’enseignement du

“Manuel d’Épictète” et son commentaire

néoplatonicien
, Paris: Librairie générale
française.
Linguiti, Alessandro, 1988, “Studi recenti sulla vita e
l’opera di Simplicio”,
Studi Classici e
Orientali
, 36: 331–346.
Praechter, Karl, 1927, “Simplicius (10)”, in
Paulys Realencyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaft
, Band III A, Halbband 5, Silacenis–Sparsus, 204–213.
Editions and Translations of His Commentaries
On Aristotle’s
On the Heavens
Standard edition of the Greek
Simplicii in Aristotelis De caelo commentaria
, Johann
Ludwig Heiberg (ed.), (Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca [CAG] 7),
Berlin 1894.
English
Simplicius,
On Aristotle On the Heavens
, multiple
volumes, (Ancient Commentators on Aristotle), London: Bloomsbury
(Duckworth prior to 2010)
On Aristotle On the Heavens 1.1–4
, Robert J. Hankinson
(trans.), 2002.
On Aristotle On the Heavens 1.5–9
, Robert J. Hankinson
(trans.), 2004.
On Aristotle On the Heavens 1.10–12
, Robert J.
Hankinson (trans.), 2006.
On Aristotle On the Heavens 1.2–3
, Ian Mueller
(trans.), 2011.
On Aristotle On the Heavens 1.3–4
, Ian Mueller (trans.),
2011.
On Aristotle On the Heavens 2.1–9
, Ian Mueller
(trans.), 2004.
On Aristotle On the Heavens 2.10–14
, Ian Mueller
(trans.), 2005.
On Aristotle On the Heavens 3.1–7
, Ian Mueller
(trans.), 2009.
On Aristotle On the Heavens 3.7–4.6
, Ian Mueller
(trans.), 2009.
Philoponus,
Against Aristotle on the Eternity of the World
, Christian Wildberg (trans.), (Ancient Commentators on Aristotle), London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2013. [Collection of fragments, most of which can be found in Simplicius’
In cael.
]
The Treatises of Aristotle On the Heavens, On generation and
corruption, and On meteors, translated from the Greek, with copious
elucidations, from the commentaries of Simplicius on the first, and of
Olympiodorus on the last of these treatises
, Th. Taylor (trans.),
London 1807; Somerset: ND Frome 2004.
On Aristotle’s
Categories
Standard edition of the Greek
Simplicii in Aristotelis Categorias commentarium
, Carolus
Kalbfleisch (ed.), (Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca [CAG] 8),
Berlin, 1907.
English
Simplicius,
On Aristotle’s Categories
, multiple
volumes, (Ancient Commentators on Aristotle), London: Bloomsbury
(Duckworth prior to 2010)
On Aristotle’s Categories 1–4
, Michael Chase
(trans.), 2003.
On Aristotle’s Categories 5–6
, Frans A. J. de
Haas and Barrie Fleet (trans.), 2001.
On Aristotle’s Categories 7–8
, Barrie Fleet,
2002.
On Aristotle’s Categories 9–15
, Richard
Gaskin, 2000.
French
Simplicius,
Commentaire sur les
‹Catégories›
. Traduction commentée
sous la direction de I. Hadot. Fascicule I: Introduction,
Première partie (p. 1–9, 3 Kalbfleisch), traduction de
Ph. Hoffmann, commentaire et notes à la traduction par I.
Hadot, avec des appendices de P. Hadot et J.-P. Mahé, Leiden:
Brill, 1990.
–––,
Commentaire sur les
‹Catégories›
. Traduction commentée
sous la direction de I. Hadot. Fascicule III: Préambule aux
Catégories, Commentaire au premier chapitre des
Catégories (p. 21–40, 13 Kalbfleisch), traduction de Ph.
Hoffmann, avec la collaboration de I. Hadot, P. Hadot et C. Luna,
commentaire et notes à la traduction par C. Luna, Leiden:
Brill, 1990.
–––,
Commentaire sur les
‹Catégories› d’Aristote, Chapitres
2–4
. Traduction par Ph. Hoffmann, avec la collaboration de
I. Hadot et P. Hadot, commentaire par C. Luna, Paris: Les Belles
Lettres, 2001.
On Aristotle’s
On the Soul
Standard edition of the Greek
Simplicii in libros Aristotelis De anima commentaria
,
Michael Hayduck (ed.), (Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca [CAG] 11),
Berlin, 1882.
English
Simplicius,
On Aristotle On the Soul
1.1–2.4
, James O. Urmson (trans.), notes by Peter Lautner,
(Ancient Commentators on Aristotle), London: Duckworth, 1995.
–––,
On Aristotle On the Soul 2.5–12
, Carlos Steel (trans.), in
collaboration with James O. Urmson, notes by Peter Lautner in
Priscian: On Theophrastus On Sense-Perception
, Pamela Huby
(trans.), (Ancient Commentators on Aristotle), London: Duckworth,
1997.
–––,
On Aristotle On the Soul
3.1–5
, Hans J. Blumenthal (trans.), (Ancient Commentators on
Aristotle), London: 2000: Duckworth.
–––,
On Aristotle On the Soul
3.6–13
, Carlos Steel (trans.), (Ancient Commentators on
Aristotle), London: Bloomsbury, 2013.
German
Priskian von Lydien (›Simplikios‹),
Kommentar zu
Aristoteles’ De anima III
, ausgewählt, eingeleitet,
übersetzt und erläutert von M. Perkams, in H. Busche, and M.
Perkams (eds.),
Antike Interpretationen zur aristotelischen Lehre
vom Geist
, Hamburg: Meiner, pp. 547–675.
On Epictetus’
Handbook
Standard edition of the Greek
Simplicius,
Commentaire sur le Manuel
d’Epictète
. Introduction et édition critique
du texte grec par I. Hadot, Leiden, 1995. [Editio maior]
–––,
Commentaire sur le Manuel
d’Epictète. I: Chapitres I–XXIX
. Texte
établi et traduit par Ilsetraud Hadot, Paris, 2001. [CUF]. [Editio
minor with French translation]
English
Simplicius,
On Epictetus’ Handbook 1–26
,
Charles Brittain and Tad Brennan (trans.), (Ancient Commentators on
Aristotle), London: Duckworth, 2002.
–––,
On Epictetus’ Handbook
27–53
, Tad Brennan and Charles Brittain (trans.), (Ancient
Commentators on Aristotle), London: Duckworth, 2002.
Epictetus, his morals, with Simplicius his comment
, made
English from the Greek, by G. Stanhope, London, 1694.
German
Simplicii Commentarius in Epicteti Enchiridion
, aus dem
Griechischen übersetzt von J. G. Schulthess (= Bibliothek der
griechischen Philosophen, 1. Band). Zürich: Orell, Füssli
und Co., 1778.
Simplikios
’
Commentar zu Epiktetos
Handbuch
, aus dem Griechischen in das Deutsche übertragen
von K. Enk. Wien: Beck, 1867.
On Aristotle’s
Physics
Standard edition of the Greek
Simplicii in Aristotelis Physicorum libros quattuor
priores/posteriores commentaria
, 2 volumes, Hermannus Diels
(ed.), (Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca [CAG] 9 and 10), Berlin,
1882–1895.
Golitsis, Pantelis and Philippe Hoffmann, 2014, “Simplicius
et le ‘Lieu’: À propos d’une nouvelle
édition du
Corollarium de loco
”,
Revue Des
Études Grecques
127: 119–175. [New edition of the
Corollary on place
]
English
Simplicius,
On Aristotle Physics
, multiple volumes,
(Ancient Commentators on Aristotle), London: Bloomsbury (Duckworth
prior to 2010)
On Aristotle Physics 1.1–2
, R. Barney (trans.), St.
Menn, forthcoming.
On Aristotle Physics 1.3–4
, Pamela Huby and C. C.
W. Taylor (trans.), 2011.
On Aristotle Physics 1.5–9
, Han Baltussen, Michael
Atkinson, Michael Share, and Ian Mueller (trans.), 2012.
On Aristotle Physics 2
, Barrie Fleet (trans.), 1997.
On Aristotle Physics 3
, James O. Urmson (trans.), notes by
Peter Lautner, 2002.
On Aristotle Physics 4.1–5, 10–14
, J. O.
Urmson (trans.), 1992.
On Aristotle Physics 5
, James O. Urmson (trans.), notes by
Peter Lautner, 1997.
On Aristotle Physics 6
, David Konstan (trans.),
1989.
On Aristotle Physics 7
, Charles Hagen (trans.),
1994.
On Aristotle Physics 8.1–5
, István
Bodnár, Michael Chase, and Michael Share (trans.), 2012.
On Aristotle Physics 8.6–10
, Richard D. McKirahan
(trans.), 2001.
–––,
Corollaries on Place and Time
, J.
O. Urmson (trans.), annotated by Lucas Siorvanes, London: Duckworth,
1992.
French
Simplicius,
Commentaire sur la Physique d’Aristote. Livre ii, ch. 1-3
, Introduction, traduction, notes et bibliographie par Alain Lernould, Villeneuve d'Ascq: Presses universitaires du Septentrion, 2019.
German
Sonderegger, E., 1982,
Simplikios: Über Die Zeit. Ein
Kommentar zum Corollarium de Tempore
, (Hypomnemata, 70),
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht. [includes a translation of the
Corollary on time
]
Editions and Translations of other Ancient Authors
Agathiae
Myrinaei Historiarum libri quinque in Corpus Fontium Historiae Byzantinae
, Rudolf Keydell (ed.), Volume 2, (Series Berolinensis), Walter de Gruyter: Berlin, 1967.
Alexander of Aphrodisias,
On the Soul, Part I: Soul as Form of the Body, Parts of the Soul, Nourishment, and Perception
, Victor Caston (trans.), (Ancient Commentators on Aristotle), London: Bristol Classical Press, 2012.
–––,
Supplement to ‘On the Soul’
, Robert W. Sharples (trans.), (Ancient Commentators on Aristotle), Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2004.
Eliae (olim Davidis),
In Aristotelis Categorias commentarium
, A. Busse (ed.), (Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca) [CAG 18], Berlin, 1900. [on the authorship of this commentary, see Helmig 2018]
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich,
Vorlesungen über die Geschichte der Philosophie 1
, Eva Moldenhauer and Karl Markus Michel (eds.), Volume 18, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp, 1986.
Philoponus,
De aeternitate mundi contra Proclum
, Hugo Rabe (ed.), (Bibliotheca scriptorium Graecorum et Romanorum Teubneriana), Lipsiae: B.G. Teubner, 1899.
Plotinus,
Opera
, Paul Henry and Hans-Rudolf Schwyzer (eds.), editio minor, 3 Volumes, (Scriptorum classicorum Bibliotheca Oxoniensis), Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1964–1982.
Plutarch’s
Moralia in Seventeen Volumes
, XIII, Part II, 1033a–1086b [On the Generation of Soul in Plato’s Timaeus], with an English translation by Harold F. Cherniss (The Loeb classical library, 427), Cambridge (Mass.) – London: Harvard University Press – William Heinemann LTD, 1976.
Procli Diadochi
In Platonis Timaeum commentaria
, Ernst Diehl (ed.), (Bibliotheca scriptorum Graecorum et Romanorum Teubneriana), Leipzig: Teubner, 1903–1906. [reprinted Amsterdam: Hakkert, 1965]
Proclus,
The Elements of Theology
, a revised text with translation, introduction and commentary by Eric Robertson Dodds, second edition, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1963. [first published 1933]
–––,
Commentary on Plato’s Timaeus. Volume 1, book I: Proclus on the Socratic State and Atlantis
, Harold Tarrant (trans.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
Scholarly works
Balansard, Anne and Annick Jaulin (eds.), 2017,
Alexandre
d’Aphrodise et La Métaphysique
Aristotélicienne
, (Aristote : Traductions et
Études), Leuven: Peeters.
Baltussen, Han, 2002, “Philology or Philosophy? Simplicius
on the Use of Quotations”, in
Epea and Grammata. Oral and
Written Communication in Ancient Greece
, Ian Worthington and John
Foley (eds.), Leiden: Brill, 173–189.
doi:10.1163/9789004350922_016
–––, 2015, “Simplicius on Elements and
Causes in Greek Philosophy: Critical Appraisal or Philosophical
Synthesis?”, in
Causation and Creation in Late
Antiquity
, Anna Marmodoro and Brian D. Prince (eds.), Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 111–128.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781107447974.008
–––, 2016,
The Peripatetics:
Aristotle’s Heirs 322 BCE - 200 CE
, London: Routledge.
doi:10.4324/9781315719092
–––, 2018, “Simplicius and the
Commentator’s Task: Clarifying Exegeses and Exegetical
Techniques”, in Strobel 2018: 159–183.
Baltzly, Dirk, 2002, “What Goes Up: Proclus Against
Aristotle on the Fifth Element”,
Australasian Journal of
Philosophy
, 80(3): 261–287. doi:10.1080/713659466
Barney, Rachel, 2009, “Simplicius: Commentary, Harmony, and
Authority”,
Antiquorum Philosophia
, 3: 101–120.
doi:10.1400/127754
Blackwell, Constance, 2011, “Neo-Platonic Modes Of
Concordism Versus Definitions Of Difference: Simplicius, Augustinus
Steuco And Ralph Cudworth Versus Marco Antonio Zimara And Benedictus
Pererius”, in
Laus Platonici Philosophi: Marsilio Ficino and
his Influence
, Stephen Clucas, Peter J. Forshaw, and Valery Rees
(eds.), Leiden: Brill, 317–342.
doi:10.1163/ej.9789004188976.i-384.55
Blumenthal, H. J. and A. C. Lloyd, (eds.), 1982,
Soul and the
Structure of Being in Late Neoplatonism: Syrianus, Proclus, and
Simplicius; Papers and Discussions of a Colloquium Held at Liverpool,
15–16 April 1982
, Liverpool: Liverpool University
Press.
Bole, Thomas James, 1993,
Plato and Aristotle in Agreement:
The Neoplatonist Commentaries on Aristotle’s Categories
.
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Texas at Austin.
Bormann, Karl, 1979, “The Interpretation of Parmenides by
the Neoplatonist Simplicius”:,
The Monist
, 62(1):
30–42. doi:10.5840/monist19796215
Bossier, Fernand, 1975,
Filologisch-Historische Navorsingen
over de Middleeuwse En Humanistische Latijnse Vertalingen van Den
Commentaren van Simplicius, Deel I: De Commentaren In Ench., In Phys.,
In Cat., In De Anima; Deel II: De Commentaar In De Caelo; Deel III:
Teksten En Documenten
. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of
Leuven.
–––, 1987, “Traductions latines et
influences du commentaire in De Caelo en occident (XIIIe–XIVe
s.)”, in I. Hadot 1987: 289–325.
Bossier, Fernand and Carlos Steel, 1972, “Priscianus Lydus
en de ‘In de Anima’ van Pseudo(?)-Simplicius”,
Tijdschrift Voor Filosofie
, 34(4): 761–822.
Bowen, Alan C., 2013,
Simplicius on the Planets and their
Motions: In Defense of a Heresy
, (Philosophia Antiqua, 133),
Leiden: Brill. doi:10.1163/9789004241718
Brittain, Charles and Tad Brennan, 2002,
Simplicius: On
Epictetus’ Handbook 1–26
, Tad Brennan and Charles
Brittain (trans.), London: Duckworth.
Cameron, Averil, 1969/70, “Agathias on the
Sassanians”,
Dumbarton Oaks Papers
, 23/24:
67–183. doi:10.2307/1291291
Cardullo, R. Loredana, 1997, “La
Νοϵρὰ
Θϵωρία di Giamblico, come Chiave di
Lettura delle Categorie Di Aristotele: alcuni esempi”,
Syllecta Classica
, 8: 79–94.
doi:10.1353/syl.1997.0016
Champion, M., 2004,
The Eternity of the World in the Sixth
Century: Philoponus, Simplicius and Cosmas Indicopleustes
,
Honours thesis, University of Melbourne.
Chase, Michael, 2000,
Études sur le commentaire de
Porphyre sur les ‘Categories’ d’Aristote
adressé à Gédalios
, Ph.D. Dissertation,
thèse inédite de la V Section de l’École
pratique des Hautes Études, Paris [with a French
translation].
–––, 2008, “The Medieval Posterity of
Simplicius’ Commentary on the Categories: Thomas Aquinas and
Al-Fārābī”, in
Medieval Commentaries on
Aristotle’s Categories
, Lloyd A. Newton (ed.), Leiden:
Brill, pp. 9–29. doi:10.1163/ej.9789004167520.I-441.6
Chiaradonna, Riccardo, 2017, “Catégories et
métaphysique chez Alexandre d’Aphrodise:
l’exégèse de
Catégories
5”,
in Balansard and Jaulin 2017: 157–180.
Chiaradonna, Riccardo and Marwan Rashed, forthcoming,
Boéthos de Sidon exégète d’Aristote et
philosophe
, (Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca et Byzantina),
Berlin: de Gruyter.
Coope, Ursula, 2016, “Rational Assent and
Self–Reversion: A Neoplatonist Response to the Stoics”, in
Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy
, Volume 50, Victor
Caston (ed.), Oxford: Oxford University Press, 237–288.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198778226.003.0007
Cordero, Nestor-Luis, 1987, “Simplicius et
l’«école» éléate”, in I.
Hadot 1987: 166–182.
Croese, Irma Maria, 1998,
Simplicius on Continuous and
Instantaneous Change: Neoplatonic Elements in Simplicius’
Interpretation of Aristotelian Physics
, (Quaestiones Infinita,
23), Utrecht: Zeno Institute of Philosophy.
D’Ancona, Cristina, 2002, “Commenting on Aristotle:
From Late Antiquity to the Arab Aristotelianism”, in
Der
Kommentar in Antike und Mittelalter
, volume 1, Wilhelm Geerlings
and Christian Schulz (eds.), (Clavis Commentariorum Antiquitatis et
Medii Aevi, 2), Leiden: Brill, pp. 201–251.
de Haas, F. A. J., 2000, “Mathematik und Phänomene:
Eine Polemik über Naturwissenschaftliche Methode in
Simplikios”,
Antike Naturwissenschaft und ihre
Rezeption
, 10: 107–129.
–––, 2002, “Modifications of the Method of
Inquiry in Aristotle’s Physics I.1: An Essay on the Dynamics of
the Ancient Commentary Tradition”, in
The Dynamics of
Aristotelian Natural Philosophy from Antiquity to the Seventeenth
Century
, Cees L. Leijenhorst, Christoph H. Lüthy, and
Johannes M. M. H. Thijssen (eds.), (Medieval and Early Modern Science,
5), Leiden: Brill, pp. 31–56.
–––, 2010, “Priscian of Lydia and
Pseudo-Simplicius on the Soul”, in
The Cambridge History of
Philosophy in Late Antiquity
, volume 2, Lloyd P. Gerson (ed.),
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 756–764 (bib.
1147–1149). doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521194846.012
Diels, Hermann, 1879,
Doxographi Graeci
, Berlin:
Weidmannsche Buchhandlung.
–––, 1903,
Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker,
Griechisch und Deutsch
, Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung.
Dillon, John M., 1997, “Iamblichus’
Νοϵρὰ
Θϵωρία of Aristotle’s
Categories”,
Syllecta Classica
, 8: 65–77.
doi:10.1353/syl.1997.0013
Falcon, Andrea (ed.), 2016,
Brill’s Companion to the
Reception of Aristotle in Antiquity
, (Brill’s Companions to
Classical Reception 7), Leiden: Brill. doi:10.1163/9789004315402
–––, 2017,
Aristotelismo
, Turin:
Piccola Biblioteca Einaudi.
Festugière, A.-J., 1963 [1971], “Modes de Composition
Des Commentaires de Proclus”,
Museum Helveticum
, 20(2):
77–100. Reprinted in his
Études de philosophie
grecque
, Paris: Vrin, 1971, pp. 551–574.
Finamore, John F. and John M. Dillon, 2002,
Iamblichus
“De Anima”: Text, Translation, and Commentary
,
(Philosophia Antiqua, 92), Leiden: Brill.
doi:10.1163/9789047401421
Gabor, Gary, 2014, “The Justification and Derivation of
Aristotle’s Categories in Ammonius and Simplicius”,
Quaestiones Disputatae
, 4(2): 100–113.
doi:10.5840/qd2014427
Gaskin, R., 1998, “Simplicius on the Meaning of Sentences: A
Commentary on
In Cat.
396,30-397,28”,
Phronesis
, 43(1): 42–62.
doi:10.1163/15685289860517793
Gätje, Helmut, 1982, “Simplikios in der arabischen
Überlieferung”,
Der Islam
, 59(1): 6–31.
doi:10.1515/islm.1982.59.1.6
Gavray, Marc-Antoine, 2007,
Simplicius lecteur du Sophiste.
Contribution à l’étude de
l’exégèse néoplatonicienne
, Paris:
Klincksieck.
–––, 2011a, “Archytas lu par Simplicius.
Un art de la conciliation”,
The International Journal of the
Platonic Tradition
, 5(1): 85–158.
doi:10.1163/187254711X555540
–––, 2011b, “Confronter les idées.
Un exemple de conciliation litigieuse chez Simplicius”,
Études Platoniciennes
, 8: 145–160.
doi:10.4000/etudesplatoniciennes.466
–––, 2018, “Reconciling Plato’s and
Aristotle’s Cosmologies: Attempts at Harmonization in
Simplicius”, in Strobel 2018: 101–125.
Gerson, Lloyd P., 2005,
Aristotle and Other Platonists
,
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Golitsis, Pantelis, 2007, “Nicéphore Blemmyde
lecteur du commentaire de Simplicius à la Physique
d’Aristote”, in
The Libraries of the
Neoplatonists
, Cristina D’Ancona (ed.), (Philosophia
Antiqua, 107), Leiden: Brill, pp. 243–259.
doi:10.1163/ej.9789004156418.i-536.17
–––, 2008a,
Les Commentaires de Simplicius et
de Jean Philopon à La Physique d’Aristote: Tradition et
Innovation
, (Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca et Byzantina, 3),
Berlin: de Gruyter.
–––, 2008b, “Un commentaire
perpétuel de Georges Pachymère à la Physique
d’Aristote, Faussement Attribué à Michel
Psellos”,
Byzantinische Zeitschrift
, 100(2):
637–676. doi:10.1515/BYZS.2008.637
–––, 2016, “Simplicius and Philoponus on
the Authority of Aristotle”, in Falcon 2016: 419–448.
–––, 2017a, “Alexandre d’Aphrodise,
Simplicius, et la cause efficiente de l’univers”, in
Balansard and Jaulin 2017: 217–236.
–––, 2017b, “On Simplicius’ Life and
Works: A Response to Hadot”,
Aestimatio
, 12:
56–82.
–––, 2018, “Simplicius, Syrianus and the
Harmony of Ancient Philosophers”, in Strobel 2018:
69–100.
Gregoric, Pavel and Christoph Helmig, 2011,
“ὁμόσε
χωρεῖν: Simplicius,
Corollarium de
loco
601.26–8 (Diels)”,
The Classical
Quarterly
, 61(2): 722–730.
doi:10.1017/S0009838811000073
Griffin, Michael J., 2012, “What Has Aristotelian Dialectic
to Offer a Neoplatonist? A Possible Sample of Iamblichus at Simplicius
on the
Categories
12,10–13,12”,
The
International Journal of the Platonic Tradition
, 6(2):
173–185. doi:10.1163/18725473-12341234
–––, 2015,
Aristotle’s Categories in
the Early Roman Empire
, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
doi:10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198724735.001.0001
–––, 2018, “Language Converts Psyche:
Reflections on Commentary in Late Ancient Philosophical Research and
Education”, in Strobel 2018: 127–157.
Groisard, Jocelyn, 2016,
Mixis: Le problème du
mélange dans la philosophie grecque d’Aristote à
Simplicius
, (Anagôgê, 9), Paris: Les Belles
Lettres.
Guldentops, Guy, 2005, “Plato’s Timaeus in
Simplicius’ De Caelo: A Confrontation with Alexander”, in
Leinkauf and Steel 2005: 195–212.
Hadot, Ilsetraut, 1969, “Die Widerlegung des
Manichäismus im Epiktetkommentar des Simplikios”,
Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie
, 51(1):
31–57. doi:10.1515/agph.1969.51.1.31
–––, 1978,
Le Problème du
Néoplatonisme Alexandrin: Hiéroclès et
Simplicius
. Paris: Études Augustiniennes.
––– (ed.), 1987,
Simplicius, sa vie, son
œuvre, sa survie: actes du colloque international de Paris (28
Sept. – 1er Oct. 1985)
, (Peripatoi.
Philologisch-historische Studien zum Aristotelismus 15), Berlin: de
Gruyter.
––– (ed.), 1995,
Simplicius: Commentaire sur
le Manuel d’Epictète
, (Philosophia Antiqua, 66),
Leiden: Brill. doi:10.1163/9789004320888
–––, 2002, “Simplicius or Priscianus? On
the Author of the Commentary on Aristotle’s
De Anima
(CAG XI): A Methodological Study”,
Mnemosyne
, 55(2):
159–199. doi:10.1163/15685250252989724
–––, 2007, “Dans quel lieu le
néoplatonicien Simplicius a-t-il fondé son école
de mathématiques, et où a pu avoir lieu son entretien
avec un manichéen?”,
The International Journal of the
Platonic Tradition
, 1(1): 42–107.
doi:10.1163/187254707X194654
––– (ed.), 2014,
Le Néoplatonicien
Simplicius à La Lumière de La Recherche
Contemporaine
, Berlin: Akademia-Verlag.
–––, 2015,
Athenian and Alexandrian
Neoplatonism and the Harmonization of Aristotle and Plato
,
(Studies in Platonism, Neoplatonism, and the Platonic Tradition, 18),
Michael Chase (trans.), Leiden: Brill. doi:10.1163/9789004281592
Hadot, Ilsetraut and Philippe Hoffman, 1990,
Simplicius,
Commentaire sur les ‹Catégories›
. Traduction
commentée sous la direction de I. Hadot. Fascicule I:
Introduction, Première partie (p. 1–9,3 Kalbfleisch),
traduction de Ph. Hoffmann, commentaire et notes à la
traduction par I. Hadot, avec des appendices de P. Hadot et J.-P.
Mahé, Leiden: Brill.
Hadot, Pierre, 1987, “La Survie du Commentaire de Simplicius
sur la Manual d’Épictète du XVe au XVII
Siècles: Perotti, Politien, Steuchus, John Smith,
Cudworth”, in I. Hadot 1987: 326–367.
–––, 1995,
Philosophy as a Way of Life. Spiritual Exercises from Socrates to Foucault
, edited with an introduction by Arnold I. Davidson, translated by Michael Chase, Oxford/Cambridge (MA): Blackwell. [English translation of Pierre Hadot,
Exercices spirituels et philosophie antique
, (Collection des études augustiniennes. Série antiquité, 88), Paris: Etudes augustiniennes, 1981]
Hankey, Wayne J., 2002, “Thomas’ Neoplatonic
Histories: His Following of Simplicius”,
Dionysius
, 20:
153–178.
Harari, Oma, 2009, “Simplicius on the Reality of Relations
and Relational Change”,
Oxford Studies in Ancient
Philosophy
, Volume 37, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
245–274.
–––, 2012, “Simplicius on Tekmeriodic
Proofs”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science Part
A
, 43(2): 366–375. doi:10.1016/j.shpsa.2011.12.032
Harlfinger, Dieter, 1987, “Einige Aspekte der
handschriftlichen Überlieferung des Physikkommentars des
Simplikios”, in I. Hadot 1987: 267–286.
Hauer, Mareike, 2015, “Simplicius on predication”,
Revue de philosophie ancienne
, 33(2): 173–199.
doi:10.3917/rpha.332.0173
–––, 2016a, “The Notion of
ἐπιτηδειότης
in Simplicius’ Discussion of Quality”,
Documenti e
Studi sulla Tradizione Filosofica Medievale
, 27:
65–83.
–––, 2016b, “Simplicius on the Relation
between Quality and Qualified”,
Méthexis
, 28:
111–140. doi:10.1163/24680974-02801008
–––, 2018,
The Explanation of Qualitative
Properties in Simplicius’ Commentary on Aristotle’s
Categories
, Ph.D. Dissertation, KU Leuven.
Helmig, Christoph, 2009, “‘The Truth Can Never Be
Refuted’: Syrianus’ view(s) on Aristotle
Reconsidered”, in
Syrianus et la Métaphysique de
l’Antiquité tardive
, A. Longo (ed.), (Elenchos, 51),
Rome: Bibliopolis, pp. 347–380.
–––, 2012,
Forms and Concepts: Concept
Formation in the Platonic Tradition
, (Commentaria in Aristotelem
Graeca et Byzantina, 5), Berlin: de Gruyter.
–––, 2014, “Iamblichus, Proclus and
Philoponus on Parts, Capacities and ousiai of the Soul and the Notion
of Life”, in
Partitioning the Soul: Debates from Plato to
Leibniz
, Klaus Corcilius and Dominik Perler (eds.), Berlin: de
Gruyter, pp. 149–178.
–––, 2018, “Die Jeweiligen Eigenheiten der
Neuplatoniker David und Elias und die umstrittene Autorschaft des
Kommentars zur Kategorienschrift”, in Strobel 2018:
277–307.
Helmig, Christoph and Carlos Steel, 2018, “Priskianos

Lydos”, in
Philosophie der Kaiserzeit und der
Spätantike
, Christoph Riedweg, Christoph Horn, and Dietmar

Wyrwa (eds.), (Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie: Die

Philosophie der Antike, Volume 5/3), Basel: Schwabe, pp.
2112–2118, 2190–2192.
Hoffmann, Philippe, 1980, “Les Catégories
ΠΟΙ et ΠΟΤΕ chez Aristote et
Simplicius”, in
Concepts et Catégories dans la
Pensée Antique
, Pierre Aubenque (eds.),
(Bibliothèque d’histoire de La Philosophie), Paris: Vrin,
pp. 217–245.
–––, 1987a, “Aspects de La
Polémique de Simplicius Contre Philopon”, in I. Hadot
1987: 183–221.
–––, 1987b, “Catégories et langage
selon Simplicius: La question du ‘skopos’ du traité
aristotélicien des ‘Catégories’”, in
I. Hadot 1987: 61–90.
–––, 1987c, “Simplicius’
Polemics”, in
Philoponus and the Rejection of Aristotelian
Science
, (Bulletin of the Institute of Classical Studies
Supplements, 103), London: Institute of Classical Studies, pp.
57–83.
–––, 1994, “Damascius”, in
Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques
, Volume 2, Paris:
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, pp. 541–593.
–––, 1998, “La fonction des prologues
exégétiques dans la pensée pédagogique
néoplatonicienne”, in
Entrer en matière. Les
prologues
, J.-D. Dubois et B. Roussel (eds.), Paris: Cerf, pp.
209–245.
–––, 2000a, “Les catégories
aristotéliciennes pote et pou d’après le
Commentaire de Simplicius: Méthode
d’exégèse et aspects doctrinaux”, in
Le
commentaire entre tradition et innovation: Actes du Colloque
International de l’Institut des traditions textuelles, Paris et
Villejuif, 22–25 Septembre 1999
, Marie-Odile
Goulet-Cazé (ed.), (Bibliothèque d’histoire de La
Philosophie), Paris: Vrin, pp. 355–376.
–––, 2000b, “La Triade Chaldaîque
Ἔρως,
Ἀλήθεια,
Πίστις de Proclus à
Simplicius”, in
Proclus et La Théologie
Platonicienne. Actes Du Colloque International de Louvain
, Alain
Philippe Segonds and Carlos Steel (ed.), (Ancient and Medieval
Philosophy 1, 26), Leuven: Leuven University Press, pp.
459–489.
–––, 2006, “What Was Commentary in Late
Antiquity? The Example of the Neoplatonic Commentators”, in
A Companion to Ancient Philosophy
, Mary Louise Gill and
Pierre Pellegrin (eds.), (Blackwell Companions to Philosophy, 31),
Malden: Blackwell Publishers, pp. 597–622.
doi:10.1002/9781444305845.ch31
–––, 2014, “Science Théologique et
Foi Selon le Commentaire de Simplicius au de Caelo
d’Aristote”, in
De l’Antiquité Tardive au
Moyen Âge
, Elisa Coda and Cecilia Martini Bonadeo (eds.),
Paris: Vrin, pp. 277–363.
Karamanolis, George, 2006,
Plato and Aristotle in Agreement?
Platonists on Aristotle from Antiochus to Porphyry
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
–––, 2018, “Why Did Porphyry Write
Aristotelian Commentaries?”, in Strobel 2018: 9–43.
Keßler, Eckhard, 2008,
Die Philosophie der
Renaissance: Das 15. Jahrhundert
, München: C. H. Beck.
Kremer, Klaus, 1961,
Der Metaphysikbegriff in den
Aristoteleskommentaren der Ammoniusschule
, (Beiträge zur
Geschichte der Philosophie und Theologie des Mittelalters, 39.1),
Münster: Aschendorff.
Kupreeva, Inna, 2018, “§39. Alexander von Aphrodisias”, in: Christoph Riedweg / Christoph Horn / Dietmar Wyrwa (eds.),
Die Philosophie der Antike, Band 5: Philosophie der Kaiserzeit und der Spätantike
(Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie, begründet von Friedrich Ueberweg), völlig neubearbeitete Ausgabe, Basel: Schwabe, 387–390 and 442–450.
Lawrence, Marilyn, 2014, “Akrasia and Enkrateia in
Simplicius’s Commentary on Epictetus’s
Encheiridion”, in
The Neoplatonic Socrates
, Harold
Tarrant and Danielle A. Layne (eds.), Philadelphia: University of
Pennsylvania Press, pp. 127–142.
Leinkauf Thomas and Carlos Steel (eds.),
Platons
“Timaeus” als Grundtext der Kosmologie in Spätantike,
Mittelalter und Renaissance: Plato’s Timaeus and the Foundations
of Cosmology in Late Antiquity, the Middle Ages and Renaissance
,
Leuven: Leuven University Press.
Licciardi, Ivan Adriano, 2016,
Parmenide tràdito,
Parmenide tradìto nel Commentario di Simplicio alla Fisica di
Aristotele. Saggio introduttivo, Raccolta dei testi in greco,
Traduzione e Commentario
, (Symbolon, 42), Sankt Augustin:
Academia Verlag.
–––, 2017,
Critica dell’apparente e
critica apparente.Simplicio interprete di Parmenide nel commentario al
de caelo di Aristotele. Saggio introduttivo, Raccolta dei testi,
Traduzione e Commentario
, (Symbolon, 44), Sankt Augustin:
Academia Verlag.
Luna, Concetta, 1987, “La Relation chez Simplicius”,
in I. Hadot 1987: 113–147.
–––, 2001, “Review of Thiel 1999:
Simplikios und das Ende der Neuplatonischen Schule in
Athen
”,
Mnemosyne
, 54(4): 482–504.
Luna, Concetta, Alain Philippe Segonds, and Gerhard Endress, 2012,
“Proclus de Lycie”, in
Dictionnaire des Philosophes
Antiques
(Volume Vb:
De Plotina à Rutilius
Rufus
), Richard Goulet (ed.), Paris: CNRS Éditions, pp.
1564–1674.
Mansfeld, Jaap, 1994,
Prolegomena: Questions to Be Settled
Before the Study of an Author, or a Text
, (Philosophia Antiqua
61), Leiden: Brill. doi:10.1163/9789004320833
Mansion, Auguste, 1956, “Les progrès de
l’«Aristoteles Latinus»”,
Revue
Philosophique de Louvain
, 54(41): 90–111.
doi:10.3406/phlou.1956.4862
Menn, Stephen, 2010, “Simplicius on the
Theaetetus
(
In Physica
17,38–18,23 Diels)”,
Phronesis
, 55(3): 255–270.
doi:10.1163/156852810X506012
–––, 2018, “Andronicus and Boethus:
Reflections on Michael Griffin’s ‘Aristotle’s
Categories in the Early Roman Empire”,
Documenti e Studi
sulla Tradizione Filosofica Medievale
, 29: 13–43.
Meyer, Hubert, 1969,
Das Corollarium de Tempore des Simplikios
und die Aporien des Aristoteles zur Zeit
, (Monographien zur
Naturphilosophie, 8), Meisenheim: Anton Hain.
Moraux, Paul, 1971–2001,
Der Aristotelismus bei den
Griechen
, 3 volumes, Berlin: de Gruyter.
Morisson, Donald, 1997, “Philoponus and Simplicius on
Tekmeriodic Proof”, in
Method and Order in Renaissance
Philosophy of Nature: The Aristotle Commentary Tradition
, Daniel
A. Di Liscia, Eckard Kessler, and Charlotte Methue (eds.), London:
Ashgate, pp. 1–23.
Narbonne, Jean-Marc, 1987, “Définition et
description: Le problème de la saisie des genres premiers et
des individus chez Aristote dans l’exégèse de
Simplicius,”
Archive de Philosophie
, 50(4):
529–554.
Nardi, Bruno, 1951, “Il commento di Simplicio al De Anima
nelle controversie della fine del secolo XV e del secolo XVI”,
in
Testi umanistici inediti sul De Anima
, coll. Archivio di
filosofia, 1951, fasc. 1, Padova, pp. 139–206 [reprinted in B.
Nardi,
Saggi sull’aristotelismo padovano dal secolo XIV al
XVI
, Firenze: G. C. Sansone, 1958, p. 365–442].
O’Meara, Dominic J., 1989,
Pythagoras Revived: Mathematics and Philosophy in Late Antiquity
, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
–––, 2004, “Simplicius on the Place of
the Philosopher in the City”, in
The Greek Strand in Islamic
Political Thought: Proceedings of the Conference Held at the Institute
of Advanced Study, Princeton, 16–27 June 2003
, Emma
Gannagé (ed.), (Mélanges de l’Université
Saint-Joseph, 57), Beyrouth: Bibliothèque Orientale – Dar
El-Machreq, pp. 89–98.
O’Meara, Dominic J. and John Dillon, 2008,
Syrianus: On
Aristotle Metaphysics 3–4
, (Ancient commentators on
Aristotle), London: Bloomsbury Academic.
Opsomer, Jan, 2010, “Olympiodorus”, in
The
Cambridge History of Philosophy in Late Antiquity
, volume 2,
Lloyd P. Gerson (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
696–710. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521194846.009
–––, 2016, “An Intellective Perspective on
Aristotle: Iamblichus the Divine”, in Falcon 2016:
341–357.
Opsomer, Jan and Carlos Steel, 2003,
Proclus: On the Existence
of Evils
, (Ancient Commentators on Aristotle), London: Bloomsbury
Academic.
Perkams, Matthias, 2005, “Priscian of Lydia, Commentator on
the
De anima
in the Tradition of Iamblichus”,
Mnemosyne
, 58(4): 510–530.
doi:10.1163/156852505774483280
–––, 2008,
Selbstbewusstsein in der
Spätantike: Die neuplatonischen Kommentare zu Aristoteles’
“De anima”
, Berlin: de Gruyter.
–––, 2012, “Priscien de Lydie”, in
Dictionnaire des Philosophes Antiques
(Volume Vb:
De
Plotina à Rutilius Rufus
), Richard Goulet (ed.), Paris:
CNRS Éditions, pp. 1514–1521.
Perry, Bruce Millard, 1983,
Simplicius as a Source for and an
Interpreter of Parmenides
, Ph.D. Dissertation, University of
Washington.
 [
Perry 1983 available online
]
Praechter, Karl, 1922, “Nikostratos Der Platoniker”,
Hermes
, 57(4): 481–517.
Rashed, Marwan, 2011,
Alexandre d’Aphrodise, Commentaire
perdu à la Physique d’Aristote (Livres IV–VIII):
Les Scholies Byzantines
, (Commentaria in Aristotelem Graeca et
Byzantina, 1), Berlin: de Gruyter.
Rashed, Roshdi, 2005, “Les premières classifications
des courbes”,
Physis
, 42: 1–64.
Salatowsky, Sascha, 2006,
De Anima: Die Rezeption der
aristotelischen Psychologie im 16. und 17. Jahrhundert
, (Bochumer
Studien zur Philosophie, 4), Amsterdam: B. R. Grüner.
Schmitt, Charles B., 1976, “Priscianus Lydus”, in
Catalogus Translationum et Commentariorum
, Volume 3, F.
Edward Cranz and Paul Oscar Kristeller (eds.), Washington, DC: The
Catholic University of America Press, pp. 75–82.
Sharples, Robert W., 2010, “Peripatetics”, in
The
Cambridge History of Philosophy in Late Antiquity
, volume 1,
Lloyd P. Gerson (ed.), Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
140–160. doi:10.1017/CHOL9780521764407.011
Schwark, Marina, 2018, “Simplicius and Iamblichus on Shape
(
morphê
)”,
Documenti e Studi sulla Tradizione
Filosofica Medievale
, 29: 60–87.
Sorabji, Richard, 1987a,
Philoponus and the Rejection of
Aristotelian Science
, London: Duckworth.
–––, 1987b, “Simplicius: Prime Matter as
Extension”, in I. Hadot 1987: 148–165.
–––, 2005,
The Philosophy of the
Commentators 200–600 AD: A Sourcebook; I: Psychology (with
Ethics and Religion); II: Physics; III: Logic and Metaphysics
,
London: Duckworth.
Soulier, Philippe, 2014,
Simplicius et l’Infini
,
(Anagôgê), Paris: Les Belles Lettres.
Steel, Carlos G., 1978,
The Changing Self: A Study on the Soul
in Later Neoplatonism; Iamblichus, Damascius and Priscianus
,
Brüssel: Koninklijke Academie voor Wetenschappen, Letteren en
Schone Kunsten.
–––, 1997, “Introduction: The author of
the Commentary On the Soul”, in
Priscian: On Theophrastus on
Sense-Perception
, P. Huby (trans.), London: Duckworth, pp.
105–140.
–––, 2005, “Proclus’ Defence of the
Timaeus against Aristotle’s Objections”, in Leinkauf and
Steel 2005: 163–193.
––– (trans./ed.), 2013,
‘Simplicius’: On Aristotle On the Soul
3.6–13
, London: Bristol Classical Press.
–––, 2016, “Proclus’ Defence of the
Timaeus against Aristotle: A Reconstruction of a Lost Polemical
Treatise”, in
Aristotle Re-Interpreted: New Findings on
Seven Hundred Years of the Ancient Commentators
, Richard Sorabji
(ed.), London: Bloomsbury Academic, pp. 327–352.
–––, 2018, “‘The Soul Never Thinks
without a Phantasm’: How Platonic Commentators Interpret a
Controversial Aristotelian Thesis”, in Strobel 2018:
185–224.
Strange, Steven K., 1987, “Plotinus, Porphyry, and the
Neoplatonic Interpretation of the ‘Categories,’” in
Aufstieg und Niedergang der römischen Welt
, Wolfgang
Haase (ed.), Berlin: de Gruyter, ANRW 36.2, pp. 955–974.
Strobel, Benedikt (ed.), 2018,
Die Kunst Der Philosophischen
Exegese Bei Den Spätantiken Platon- Und
Aristoteles-Kommentatoren: Akten Der 15. Tagung Der Karl Und Gertrud
Abel Stiftung Vom 4. Bis 6. Oktober 2012 in Trier
, (Philosophie
Der Antike : Veröffentlichungen Der Karl Und Gertrud
Abel-Stiftung 36), Berlin: De Gruyter.
Szlezák, Thomas A., 1972,
Pseudo-Archytas über die
Kategorien
, herausgegeben, übersetzt und kommentiert von
Thomas Alexander Szlezák, (Peripatoi, 4), Berlin: de
Gruyter.
Taormina, Daniela Patrizia, 1989,
Plutarco di Atene:
L’Uno, l’Anima, le Forme; Saggio Introduttivo, Fonti,
Traduzione e Commento
, (Symbolon, 8), Catania: Università
di Catania.
Tarán, Leonardo, 1984, “Amicus Plato, sed magis amica
veritas: From Plato and Aristotle to Cervantes”,
Antike und
Abendland
, 30: 93–124. doi:10.1515/9783110241426.93
–––, 1987a, “Syrianus and
Pseudo-Alexander’s Commentary on Metaph. E-N”, in
Aristoteles – Werk und Wirkung
, Jürgen Wiesner
(ed.), Paul Moraux gewidmet, zweiter Band, Kommentierung,
Überlieferung, Nachleben, Berlin: de Gruyter, pp.
215–232.
–––, 1987b, “The Text of Simplicius’
Commentary on Aristotle’s Physics”, in I. Hadot 1987:
246–266.
Tempelis, Elias, 1998,
The School of Ammonius, Son of Hermias,
on Knowledge of the Divine
, Athens: Parnassos Literary
Society.
Thiel, Rainier, 1999,
Simplikios und das Ende der
neuplatonischen Schule in Athen
, Stuttgart: Franz Steiner.
Tornau, Christain, 2000, “Die Prinzipienlehre des Moderatos
von Gades: Zu Simplikios
in Ph
. 230,34–231,24
Diels”,
Rheinisches Museum für Philologie
, 143
(2): 197–220.
Tuominen, Miira, 2009,
The Ancient Commentators on Plato and
Aristotle
, Berkley, CA: University of California Press.
Vallat, Philippe, 2014a, “La Postérité Arabe
du Commentaire de Simplicius sur les Catégories
d’après le Fihrist d’Ibn Al-Nadīm”, in
I. Hadot 2014: 240–264.
–––, 2014b, “Le Dédicataire
d’un Commentaire de Simplicius sur le De Anima
d’après Le Fihrist d’Ibn Al-Nadīm”, in
I. Hadot 2014: 102–129.
Verbeke, Gerard, 1982, “Some Later Neoplatonic Views on
Divine Creation and the Eternity of the World”,
Neoplatonism
and Christian Thought
, in Dominic J. O’Meara (ed.),
(Studies in Neoplatonism: Ancient and Modern, 3), Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press, pp. 45–53.
Vogel, Christian, 2013,
Stoische Ethik und platonische
Bildung: Simplikios’ Kommentar zu Epiktets Handbüchlein der
Mora
, (Studien zu Literatur und Erkenntnis, 5), Heidelberg:
Universitätsverlag.
Watts, Edward J., 2005, “Where to Live the Philosophical
Life in the Sixth Century? Damascius, Simplicius, and the Return from
Persia”,
Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies
, 45(3):
285–315.
 [
Watts 2005 available online
]
–––, 2006,
City and School in Late Antique
Athens and Alexandria
, Berkeley, CA: University of California
Press.
Wilberding, James, 2005, “Aristotle, Plotinus, and Simplicius
on the Relation of the Changer to the Changed”,
The
Classical Quarterly
, 55(2): 447–454.
doi:10.1093/cq/bmi042
Wildberg, Christian, 1988,
John Philoponus’ Criticism of
Aristotle’s Theory of Aether
, (Peripatoi, 16), Berlin: de
Gruyter.
–––, 1993, “Simplicius und das Zitat: Zur
Überlieferung des Anführungszeichens”, in
Symbolae
Berolinenses: Für Dieter Harlfinger
, Friederike Berger
(ed.), Amsterdam: Hakkert, pp. 187–199.
–––, 1999, “Impetus Theory and the
Hermeneutics of Science in Simplicius and Philoponus”,
Hyperboreus
, 5(1): 107–124.
–––, 2013,
Philoponus: Against Aristotle, On
the Eternity of the World
, Christian Wildberg (trans.), (Ancient
Commentators on Aristotle), London: Bloomsbury.
–––, 2014, “The Will and Its Freedom:
Epictetus and Simplicius on What Is Up to Us”, in
What Is Up
to Us? Studies on Agency and Responsibility in Ancient
Philosophy
, Pierre Destrée, Ricardo Salles, Marco
Antônio Zingano (eds.), (Studies on Ancient Moral and Political
Philosophy, 1), Sankt Augustin: Academia Verlag, pp.
329–350.
Zahlfleisch, Johann, 2009, “Einige Corollarien des
Simplicius in seinem Commentar zu Aristoteles’
Physik
(ed. Diels). I. p. 1129–1152 (contra Philoponum)”,
Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie
, 15(2):
186–213. doi:10.1515/agph.1902.15.2.186
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
[Please contact the author with suggestions.]
Related Entries
Ammonius
|
Neoplatonism
|
Plotinus
|
Proclus
|
Syrianus
Acknowledgments
I would very much like to thank my collaborators at the University of Cologne Anna Pavani, Manuel Lorenz, Ina Schall, Fedora Hartmann, Emil Gaub and especially Laura Marongiu. I would also like to thank the anonymous referee for most useful remarks and corrections. Thanks are due to the fantastic team of the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy and its principal editor Edward N. Zalta for their patience and detailed observations. Last but not least let me thank Merrie Bergmann for correcting the English and many useful suggestions.