Thought Experiments
First published Sat Dec 28, 1996; substantive revision Thu Sep 26, 2019
Thought experiments are basically devices of the imagination. They are
employed for various purposes such an entertainment, education,
conceptual analysis, exploration, hypothesizing, theory selection,
theory implementation, etc. Some applications are more controversial
than others. Few would object to thought experiments that serve to
illustrate complex states of affairs, or those that are used in
educational contexts. The situation is different, however, with
respect to the appropriation of imagined scenarios to investigate
reality (very broadly conceived to include things like electrons,
tables, rain, beliefs, morals, people, numbers, universes, and even
divine beings). It is this use of thought experiments that attracts
most of the attention inside and outside of philosophical discourse.
Significant is the overlap here with many other central philosophical
topics, such as the nature of the imagination, the importance of
understanding in contrast to explanation, the role of intuition in
human cognition, and the relationship between fiction and truth.
Moreover, thought experiments are interdisciplinary in two important
respects. Firstly, not only philosophers study them as a research topic, but
also historians, cognitive scientists, psychologists, etc. Secondly,
they are used in many disciplines, including biology, economics,
history, mathematics, philosophy, and physics (although,
interestingly, not with the same frequency in each).
Most often thought experiments are communicated in narrative form,
frequently with diagrams. It is important to distinguish between the
imagined scenarios that are featured in thought experiments, on the
one hand, and the narratives that establish the scenarios in
people’s mind, on the other. Once a scenario is imagined it may
assume a life on its own, and this explains partly the creative power
of a good thought experiment. Experimental results may obtain that
actually run counter to the narrative that initiated the discussion of
an imagined scenario. Besides, thought experiments should be
distinguished from thinking about experiments, from merely imagining
any experiments to be conducted outside the imagination, and from
psychological experiments with thoughts, though there may be some
overlap. They should also be distinguished from counterfactual
reasoning in general, as they seem to require an experimental element,
which explains the impression that something is experienced in a
thought experiment (i.e., being seen, felt, heard, etc.; not
literally, of course). In other words, though many call any
counterfactual or hypothetical situation a thought experiment (see,
e.g., Rescher 1991), this appears too encompassing. It is a quite
different matter as to whether there is a logical structure common to
all of thought experiments. Based on considerations of logical
structure, a taxonomy has been proposed according to which all thought
experiments fall into two classes: “Necessity Refuters”
and “Possibility Refuters” (see Sorensen 1990,
132–160). Such proposals especially fuel the debate about
identity conditions of thought experiments. What modifications to
logical structure does a thought experiment tolerate before it ceases
to exist and a new one is born? In other words, how much emphasis on
propositional characteristics is appropriate in the analysis of
thought experiments?
Looking at the development of the discussion about thought experiments
over the past thirty years, it is fair to say that thought experiments
were primarily an important topic in the philosophy of science and the
philosophy of philosophy (“metaphilosophy”), before the
scope widened up at a later point. There is a simple reason for that
path. At the core of the discussion sits a relatively simple
epistemological challenge that is presented in a particularly powerful
manner by numerous thought experiments that the history of science has
to offer. They suggest that we can learn about the real world by
virtue of merely thinking about imagined scenarios. But how can we
learn about reality (if we can at all), just by thinking? Are there
really thought experiments that enable us to acquire new knowledge
about nature without new empirical data? If so, where does the new
information come from? Finally, how can we distinguish good from bad
instances of thought experiments? These questions seem urgent with
respect to scientific thought experiments, because many
“recognize them as an occasionally potent tool for increasing
our understanding of nature.… Historically their role is very
close to the double one played by actual laboratory experiments and
observations. First, thought experiments can disclose nature’s
failure to conform to a previously held set of expectations. Second,
they can suggest particular ways in which both expectation and theory
must henceforth be revised” (Kuhn 1977, p. 241 and 261). Yet,
questions surrounding the epistemological challenge that certain
scientific thought experiments pose, are equally urgent with respect
to thought experiments outside of the natural sciences. This is
especially true with respect to philosophy itself. Philosophy offers
numerous examples of thought experiments that play a role similar in
importance to some scientific thought experiments. And this fact
provokes in turn further inquiries into the relationship between the
natural sciences and philosophy, especially with respect to phenomena
that implicate both the natural sciences and philosophy, such as the
mind and free will (see, e.g., Wilkes 1988; Young 2013).
If scientific practice has room for thought experiments, then the
question arises as to why we would want philosophical methodology to
be more discriminatory in this respect. One reason that is often
offered is that results of scientific thought experiments may be
subjected to further empirical testing. Obviously, this can’t be
done for philosophical thought experiments. But, it seems difficult to
accept a categorical separation of science and philosophy along these
lines. The 17th century saw some of the most brilliant practitioners
of thought experimentation in Galileo, Descartes, Newton, and Leibniz,
all of whom pursued the project of “natural philosophy.”
And in our own time, the creation of quantum mechanics and relativity
are almost unthinkable without the crucial role played by thought
experiments, most of which relate to important philosophical issues
that arise from these scientific theories. Besides, much of ethics,
philosophy of language, and philosophy of mind is based on the results
of thought experiments in a way that seems very similar to scientific
thought experiments (though some might contest this), including
Searle’s Chinese room, Putnam’s twin earth, and
Jackson’s Mary the colour scientist. Philosophy, even more than
the sciences, would be severely impoverished without thought
experiments. These observations partly explain why it has been argued
that a more “unified” account of thought experiments is
desirable (see Boniolo 1997; Cooper 2005, pp. 329–330;
Gähde 2000). Of course, it is important not to downplay the
significant differences between the sciences and philosophy. But an
account of thought experiments seems more powerful if it can do
justice to the fact that not only in the sciences we find many of
them.
There have been several attempts to define “thought
experiment” along the lines of traditional conceptual analysis
(see, e.g., Picha 2011; McComb 2013), but likely it will be better to
leave the term loosely characterized, so as not to prejudice the
ongoing investigation. Of course, we need to have some idea as to what
thought experiments are to guide a proper philosophical analysis (see
Häggqvist 2009), but this does not mean that we need to begin
with a technical definition, specifying necessary and sufficient
conditions. In fact, many of the most important concepts we deal with
remain rather loosely defined when philosophical inquiry begins, e.g.,
religion or democracy. Luckily, there are plenty of examples to refer
to in order to circumscribe our subject matter well enough. As well as
those already mentioned, there are Newton’s bucket,
Heisenberg’s gamma-ray microscope, Einstein’s elevator,
Leibniz’s mill, Parfit’s people who split like amoebas,
and Thomson’s violinist. Everyone is probably familiar with some
of these. Less familiar thought experiments include the mouse that
breaks into the tabernacle of a medieval Roman Catholic Church
building to feed on the consecrated wafers kept in there (see Fehige
2011). Roman Catholic Christians believe that a consecrated wafer is
the body of Christ. The “substance” of the wafer,
understood in terms of Aristotelian categories, is believed to be
replaced. In its place is the “substance” of
Christ’s body after consecration by a priest. Only the
Aristotelian “accidents” of the wafer remain intact
(smell, colour, texture, etc.). Does the mouse eat the body of Christ
(if any human actually does)? Another example less known example is
“the dome” thought experiment, which is to prove
indeterminism in Newtonian physics. Imagine a mass sitting on a
radially symmetric surface in a gravitational field. Guided by
Newton’s laws of motion one comes to realize that the mass can
either remain at rest for all times, or spontaneously move in an
arbitrary direction (see Norton 2008). This thought experiment
triggers a number of very interesting questions concerning the nature
of Newtonian theory, the meaning of “physical”, and the
role of idealizations in physics. And, of course, does it show what it
claims? (see Malament 2008).
This entry opens with an overview of the characteristics of thought
experiments in light of examples. Section 2 reviews several taxonomies
for classfying thought experiments and Section 3 provides a history of
philosophical inquiry into the nature of thought experiments. Section
4 covers several views representing the current state of the debate.
The entry concludes by highlighting some trends in discussions
surrounding the so-called laboratory of the mind.
1. Important Characteristics of Thought Experiments
2. Taxonomies of Thought Experiments
3. The History of Thought Experiments
4. Current Views on Thought Experiments
4.1 The Skeptical Objection
4.2 The Intuition–Based Account
4.3 The Argument View
4.4 Conceptual Constructivism
4.5 Experimentalism
4.6 The Mental–Model Account
5. Going Forward
Bibliography
Academic Tools
Other Internet Resources
Related Entries
1. Important Characteristics of Thought Experiments
Theorizing about thought experiments usually turns on the details or
the patterns of specific cases. Familiarity with a wide range of
examples is crucial for commentators, and the list is very long (see,
e.g., Stuart et al. 2018, pp. 558–560) We will provide a few
here. One of the most beautiful early instances (found in Lucretius,
De Rerum Natura
1.951–987; see Bailey 1950, pp.
58–59) attempts to show that space is infinite: if there is a
purported boundary to the universe, we can toss a spear at it. If the
spear flies through, it isn’t a boundary after all; if the spear
bounces back, then there must be something beyond the supposed edge of
space, a cosmic wall that stopped the spear, a wall that is itself in
space. Either way, there is no edge of the universe; thus, space must
be infinite.
This example nicely illustrates many of the most common features of
what it means to engage in the conduct of thought experiments: we
visualize some situation that we have set up in the imagination; we
let it run or we carry out an operation; we see what happens; finally,
we draw a conclusion. The example also illustrates the fallibility of
thought experiments. Since the time of Lucretius, we’ve learned
how to conceptualize space so that it could be both finite and
unbounded. Imagine a circle, which is a one-dimensional space. As we
move around, there is no edge, but it is nevertheless finite. The
universe might be a three-dimensional version of this topology. It is,
therefore, true that we must try to be mindful of unexpected
limitations due to “physical scale effects” (Klee 2008),
or other such things, when imagining counterfactual scenarios.
Figure 1.
“Welcome to the edge of
the Universe”
Often a real experiment that is meant to be the analogue of a thought
experiment is impossible to be carried out as such due to physical,
technological, ethical, or financial limitations (see, e.g., Sorensen
1992, pp. 200–202); but physical unrealizability needn’t
be a defining condition of thought experiments. Rather, the main point
is that we seem able to get a grip on nature just by thinking, and
therein lies the great interest for philosophy. That was the position
of Ernst Mach (see Mach, 1897 and 1905; for most instructive
assessments of his views see Kühne 2006, pp. 165–202, and
Sorensen 1992, pp. 51–75). Thought experiments are on a spectrum
of different kinds of experiments. They allow us to tap into a great
store of “instinctive knowledge” picked up from past
experience. We will get back to Mach’s theory further down. His
account of thought experiments remains one of the major theories of
how thought experiments work. One of Mach’s favourite examples
is due to Simon Stevin (see Mach, 1883, pp. 48–58). When a chain
is draped over a double frictionless plane, as in Fig. 2a, how will it
move? Add some links as in Fig. 2b. Now it is obvious. The initial
setup must have been in static equilibrium. Otherwise, we would have a
perpetual motion machine; and according to our experience-based
“instinctive knowledge,” says Mach, this is impossible. We
do not have to perform the experiment in the real world, which we
could not do, anyway, since it would require a perfectly frictionless
plane. Nevertheless the outcome seems compelling.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.
“How will it
move?”
Judith Thomson provided one of the most striking and effective thought
experiments in the moral realm (see Thomson 1971). Her example is
aimed at a popular anti-abortion argument that goes something like
this: A fetus is an innocent person. All innocent persons have a right
to life. Abortion results in the death of a fetus. Therefore, abortion
is morally wrong. In her thought experiment, Thomson asks you to
imagine a famous violinist falling into a coma. The society of music
lovers determines from medical records that you and you alone can save
the violinist’s life by being hooked up to him for nine months.
The music lovers break into your home while you are asleep and hook
the unconscious (and unknowing, hence innocent) violinist to you. You
may want to unhook him, but you are then faced with this argument put
forward by the music lovers: The violinist is an innocent person. All
innocent persons have a right to life. Unhooking him will result in
his death. Therefore, unhooking him is morally wrong. However, the
argument, even though it has the same structure as the anti-abortion
argument, does not seem convincing in this case. You would be very
generous to remain attached for nine months, but you are not morally
obligated to do so. The parallel with the abortion case is evident.
Thomson’s thought experiment is effective in distinguishing two
concepts that had previously been run together: “right to
life” and “right to what is needed to sustain life.”
The fetus and the violinist might each have the former, but it is not
evident that either has the latter. The upshot is that even if the
fetus has a right to life (which Thomson does not believe but allows
for the sake of the argument), it may still be morally permissible to
abort. Those opposed to Thomson’s view have two options. They
can either dismiss her thought experiment as a useless fiction. In
fact, thought experiments as a method in ethics have their critics
(see, e.g., Dancy 1985). Alternatively, they can provide a different
version of the same scenario to challenge the conclusion. It is a very
intriguing feature of thought experiments that they can be
“rethought” (see Bokulich 2001). Real experiments are
frequently open to reinterpretation, too. In this respect there does
not seem to be a principled difference.
Like arguments, thought experiments can be criticized in different
ways. Perhaps the set up is faulty; perhaps the conclusions drawn from
the thought experiment are not justified. Similar criticisms can arise
in real experiments. Counter thought experiments are perhaps another
form of criticism. They do not target the premises or conclusions
involved in a particular thought experiment but question the
phenomenon, i.e. the non-propositional heart of an imagined scenario
(see Brown 2007). For example, Daniel Dennett is convinced that Frank
Jackson’s Mary thought experiment is poor evidence to oppose
physicalism in philosophy of mind. In Jackson’s version, Mary,
who knows everything physics and the neurosciences can possibly know
about colours but grew up in a colourless environment (seeing only
black, white and grey things), allegedly learns something new when she
sees a red tomato for the first time. Now she knows what it is like to
experience red. This is an argument for qualia as something over and
above the physical. Instead of a red tomato, Dennett, in his version
of the thought experiment, presents Mary with a bright blue banana. In
his version of the story (which seems just as plausible as
Jackson’s), Mary balks and says she is being tricked, since she
knows that bananas are yellow, and this, says Mary, is a consequence
of knowing everything physical about colour perception. Mary does not
learn anything new when she sees coloured objects for the first time,
so there is no case against physicalism after all. Jackson’s
initial thought experiment was very persuasive, but Dennett’s
was equally so, thus, undermining Jackson’s argument.
Clearly, thought experiments are characterized by an intriguing
plasticity, and this raises the interesting question of what it is
that preserves the identity of a thought experiment. Replacing a red
tomato with a blue banana might still leave us with the same thought
experiment––slightly revised. But, at what point do we get
a new thought experiment? This is not merely a question about
conceptual vagueness. It helps to facilitate a discussion of the
intuitively most plausible view about the cognitive efficacy of
thought experiments, according to which this power depends on their
being arguments, in a fairly strict sense of argument. John D. Norton
holds such a view, which will be discussed below. In light of cases
where the discussion of one and the same thought experiment played an
important role in settling a dispute, the following problem arises:
how can one and the same thought experiment support opposing views
about a particular matter if the arguments that correspond to the
different versions of the thought experiment that were entertained by
the disputing parties are significantly different? The dilemma is: we
could say that if there is more than one argument then there is more
than one thought experiment involved in the dispute. But if that is
true then the disputing parties simply talked past each other. One
party presented an argument that the other party ignored while
presenting their own. Alternatively, we can say that one thought
experiment can correspond to many different arguments. But, if that is
true then it becomes unclear in what non-trivial sense thought
experiments are supposed to be identical with arguments (see Bishop
1999, and the response by Norton 2004, 63–64).
The plasticity of thought experiments coheres with another feature of
thought experiments, namely that they seem to have “evidential
significance only historically and locally, i.e., when and where
premises that attribute evidential significance to it […] are
endorsed” (McAllister 1996, p. 248).
2. Taxonomies of Thought Experiments
Many taxonomies can be found in the literature. They are not mutually
exclusive. We will present three of them. The first follows the type
of purpose thought experiments serve. A very rudimentary version of it
can be found in (Mach, 1897 and 1905). Such a classification makes
sense, because an “imaginary experiment should be judged on its
specific purpose” (Krimsky 1973, p. 331). Thought experiments
are conducted for diverse reasons (see, e.g., DeMay 2006; Sorensen
1992, pp. 7–15), and this in a variety of areas, including the
economics (see, e.g., Herfeld 2019; Thoma 2016), education (Helm and
Gilbert 1985; Helm et al. 1985, Klassen 2006; Sriraman 2006; Stonier
1990), history (see, e.g., Maar 2014; Reiss 2009), literature (see,
e.g., Davies 2007; Elgin 2004), mathematics (see, e.g. Brown 1991
[2011], pp. 90–97; Glas 1999), morality (see, e.g., Hauerwas
1996; Wilson 2016), as well as the natural (see Krimsky 1973), the
socio-political realm (see, e.g. Roberts 1993: Thaler 2016), and
theology (see, e.g., Gregersen 2014; Fehige 2018). Thought experiments
may be used to entertain. This is probably true of short stories or
novels which some argue qualify as thought experiments if certain
conditions apply (see, e.g., Davenport 1983). Some thought experiments
fulfil a specific function within a theory (see Borsboom et al. 2002).
Others are executed because it is impossible to run the experimental
scenario in the real world (see, e.g., Sorensen 1992, pp.
200–202). Sometimes thought experiments help to illustrate and
clarify very abstract states of affairs, thereby accelerating the
process of understanding (see Behmel 2001). Again others serve as
examples in conceptual analysis (see Cohnitz 2006). And, then there
are those that matter in the process of theory discovery (Praem and
Steglich–Peterson 2015). The thought experiments that have
received most of the attention are taken to provide evidence for or
against a theory, putting them on a par with real-world experiments
(see, e.g., Gendler 2004). The different ways to use thought
experiments, of course, do not exclude one another. Most obviously,
for example, a thought experiment can both entertain and make a case
against a theory.
A second taxonomy classifies thought experiments in terms of logical
structure (see Sorensen 1992, pp. 132–166). The idea is to
divide all thought experiments into two types of “alethic
refuters”: “Although there are a number of ways to
classify thought experiments, a refutation format scores the most
points when judged by familiarity, specificity, and simplicity.
According to this scheme, thought experiments aim at overturning
statements by disproving one of their modal consequences. Modalities
are operators that are applied to propositions to yield new
propositions. There are deontic modalities (
permissible,
forbidden
), epistemic modalities (
know, believe
), and
alethic modalities (
possible, necessary
). The alethic
modalities are the best–known and more–basic modality.
Hence, we won’t miss anything by concentrating on them”
(Sorensen 1992, p. 135). One type of thought experiment “is
designed to refute a statement by showing that something ruled out as
impossible by that statement is really possible after all”
(Sorensen 1992, p. 135). The most discussed examples in the
metaphilosophical discussion on thought experiments is of such a type,
namely the Gettier scenarios (see Grundmann & Horvarth 2014;
Saint-Germier 2019). They are designed to refute the claim that all
knowledge is justified, true belief. They serve as a “necessity
refuter.” The other type collects examples of “possibility
refuters”. They don’t affirm “the possibility of the
thought experiment’s content”. Instead, they establish
“copossibilities”. A wonderful example is the scenario of
an omnipotent God who faces the task of creating a stone too heavy for
her to lift. It seems God cannot succeed. The notion of divine
omnipotence causes some headaches here.
A third taxonomy (see Brown 1991, chapter 2), which has not gone
unchallenged (see Norton 1993b), is more limited than the first two
insofar as it focuses largely on the class of those thought
experiments that are taken to function in theory choice, which is the
use of thought experiments that has been receiving most of the
attention. According to this taxonomy, the main division is
constructive vs. destructive
and resembles Karl
Popper’s distinction between
apologetic
and
critical
thought experiments. Popper actually distinguishes
between three types of thought experiments:
heuristic
(to
illustrate a theory),
critical
(against a theory) and
apologetic
(in favour of a theory) (see Popper 1959). His
case in favour of a critical and against an apologetic use of thought
experiments is very limited. He focuses exclusively on quantum physics
and doesn’t really say much to address the primary
epistemological challenge presented by the success of critical thought
experiments.
Among
destructive thought experiments
, the following subtypes
can be identified: the simplest of these is to draw out a
contradiction in a theory, thereby refuting it. The first part of
Galileo’s famous falling bodies example does this. It shows that
in Aristotle’s account, a composite body (cannon ball and musket
ball attached) would have to fall both faster and slower than the
cannon ball alone. A second subtype is constituted by those thought
experiments that aim to show that the theory in question is in
conflict with other beliefs that we hold. Schrödinger’s
well-known cat paradox, for instance, does not show that quantum
theory (at least on some interpretations) is internally inconsistent
(see Schrödinger 1935, p. 812; translation: Trimmer 1980, p.
328): “A cat is penned up in a steel chamber, along with the
following diabolical device (which must be secured against direct
interference by the cat): in a Geiger counter there is a tiny bit of
radioactive substance, so small, that perhaps in the course of one
hour one of the atoms decays, but also, with equal probability,
perhaps none; if it happens, the counter tube discharges and through a
relay releases a hammer which shatters a small flask of hydrocyanic
acid. If one has left this entire system to itself for an hour, one
would say that the cat still lives if meanwhile no atom has decayed.
The first atomic decay would have poisoned it. The q-function of the
entire system would express this by having in it the living and the
dead cat (pardon the expression) mixed or smeared out in equal
parts.” This thought experiment shows that quantum theory (as
interpreted by Bohr) is in conflict with some very powerful common
sense beliefs we have about macro-sized objects such as
cats––they cannot be both dead and alive in any sense
whatsoever. The bizarreness of superpositions in the atomic world is
worrisome enough, says Schrödinger, but when it implies that same
bizarreness at an everyday level, it is intolerable. There is a third
subtype of negative thought experiments, namely when, in effect, a
central assumption or premise of the thought experiment itself is
undermined. For example, as we have seen above, Thomson showed with
her thought experiment that “right to life” and
“right to what is needed to sustain life” had been run
together. When distinguished, the argument against abortion is
negatively affected.
A fourth sub-type of negative thought experiments are “counter
thought experiments” (see Brown 2007). Norton very usefully
introduces a related idea:
“thought-experiment/anti-thought-experiment pairs” (see
Norton 2004, pp. 45–49). Above, we have already encountered this
subtype in our discussion of Lucretius’ spear-thought
experiment, and with Dennett’s reply to Jackson’s much
discussed Mary the colour scientist thought experiment. Here we would
like to add one more example, namely Mach’s counter thought
experiment against absolute space. In his
Principia
Mathematica
, Newton offers a pair of thought experiments as
evidence for absolute space. One is the bucket with water climbing the
wall, the other is a pair of spheres joined by a cord that maintained
its tension in otherwise empty space. The explanation for these
phenomena, argues Newton, is absolute space: the bucket and the joined
spheres are rotating with respect to space itself. In response, Mach
modifies the scenario and argues, contra Newton, that the two spheres
would move toward one another thanks to the tension in the cord, and
if we rotated a very thick, massive ring around a stationary bucket,
we would see the water climb the bucket wall. (For further discussion
of Mach’s counter thought experiment to Newton’s see
Kühne 2006, pp. 191–202). In short, the point of
Mach’s counter thought experiments is to describe the phenomena
of the thought experiments’ scenarios differently, that is, to
declare that different things would happen. Mach’s counter
thought experiment undermines our confidence in Newton’s.
Absolute space might be a plausible explanation of the phenomena in
Newton’s thought experiments, but now, in light of Mach’s
counter thought experiment, we’re not so sure of the phenomena
itself and thus of the idea of absolute space.
Figure 3.
Stages in the bucket
experiment
Figure 4.
Two spheres held by a cord in
otherwise empty space
To be effective, counter thought experiments needn’t be very
plausible at all. In a court of law a jury would convict provided
guilt is established “beyond a reasonable doubt.” A common
defence strategy is to provide an alternative account of the evidence
that has just enough plausibility to put the prosecution’s case
into some measure of doubt. That is sufficient to undermine it. A
counter thought experiment need only do that much to be effective, and
in this sense it operates like a “necessity refuter” in
Sorensen’s sense.
In addition to destructive ones, there is a second type, the
constructive thought experiments
. Unsurprisingly, there are
many ways they could provide positive support for a theory. One of
these is to provide a kind of illustration that makes a theory’s
claims clear and evident. In such cases thought experiments serve as a
kind of heuristic aid. A result may already be well established, but
the thought experiment can lead to a very satisfying sense of
understanding. In his
Principia Mathematica
, Newton provides
a wonderful example showing how the moon is kept in its orbit in just
the same way as an object falls to the earth (see Ducheyne 2006, pp.
435–437). He illustrates this by means of a cannon shooting a
cannon ball further and further. In the limit, the earth curves away
as fast as the ball falls, with the eventual result being that the
cannon ball will return to the spot where it was fired, and, if not
impeded, will go around again and again. This is what the moon is
doing. We could arrive at the same conclusion through calculation. But
Newton’s thought experiment provides that elusive sense of
understanding. It’s a wonderful example of the “aha
effect” that is typical of many powerful thought
experiments.
Figure 5.
“The shot heard around
the world”
Thomson’s violinist showed that abortion could be morally
permissible even when the fetus has a right to life. Similarly,
Einstein’s elevator showed that light will bend in a
gravitational field, because according to the principle of
equivalence, there is no difference between such a frame of reference
and one that is accelerating in free space; the laws of physics are
the same in all. Suppose then, an observer is inside an elevator
sealed off from the outside so that the observer cannot tell whether
he is in a gravitational field or accelerating. If it were
accelerating, and if a light beam were to enter one side, then, due to
the elevator’s motion, the beam would appear to drop or curve
down as it crossed the elevator. Consequently, it would have to do the
same thing if the elevator was in a gravitational field. Therefore,
gravity ‘bends’ light.
Maxwell’s demon showed that entropy could be decreased: The
second law of thermodynamics implies that heat won’t pass from a
cold body to a hot one. In classical thermodynamics this law is quite
strict; but in Maxwell’s kinetic theory of heat there is a
probability, though extremely small, of such an event happening. Some
thought this a reductio ad absurdum of Maxwell’s theory. To show
how it is possible to violate the second law, Maxwell imagined a tiny
creature who controls a door between two chambers. Fast molecules from
the cold box are let into the hot box, and slow molecules from the hot
are allowed into the cold. Thus, there will be an increase in the
average speed in the hot box and a decrease in the average speed of
molecules in the cold. Since, on Maxwell’s theory, heat is just
the average speed of the molecules, there has been a flow of heat from
a cold body to a hot one.
Parfit’s splitting persons shows that survival is a more
important notion than identity when considering personhood (for a
critical discussion see Gendler 2002a). We say they “show”
such and such, but, “purport to show” might be better,
since some of these thought experiments are quite contentious. What
they have in common is that they aim to establish something positive.
Unlike destructive thought experiments, they are not trying to
demolish an existing theory, though they may do that in passing. In
principle, given the fact that thought experiments can be rethought
(see Bokulich 2001), and that the evidential significance is dependent
on historical and local accomplishments (see McAllister 1996), it
cannot be irrelevant to identify the intention of the thought
experimenter, if one wants to determine the type of a thought
experiment: “An imaginary experiment should be judged on its
specific purpose” (Krimsky 1973, p. 331).
3. The History of Thought Experiments
The practice of thought experiments is not an invention of philosophy
and modern science. On the other hand, the view that the Pre-Socratics
“invented thought experimentation as a cognitive procedure and
practiced it with great dedication and versatility” (Rescher
2005, p. 2) might be a stretch. With such a claim one risks
underestimating the entanglement of concepts and corresponding
reality. It is probably much more correct to say something like the
following: “There is no ancient Greek term corresponding to what
we nowadays refer to as a thought experiment, and presumably ancient
philosophers did not have our modern notion of a thought experiment.
But there is no doubt that they did use thought experiments. In fact,
they often employed them in ways similar to those of contemporary
philosophers, that is, both for defending their own theories as well
as for refuting the theories of their opponents.”(Ierodiakonou
2018, p. 31; see also Becker 2018; Diamond 2002, pp. 229–232;
Fuhrer 2009; Glas 1999; Ierodiakonou 2005; Ierodiakonou and Roux
(eds.) 2011; Irvine 1991; Rescher 1991 and 2005, pp. 61–72). The
situation is similar with respect to medieval natural philosophy,
although there are further nuances to be considered (see King 1991).
According to Edward Grant, during the late Middle Ages “the
imagination became a formidable instrument in natural philosophy and
theology in ways that would have astonished ancient Greek natural
philosophers, especially Aristotle” (Grant 2007, p. 201). But
this doesn’t mean that we have reason to think of Aristotle as
an opponent of the conduct of thought experiments. On the contrary,
“Aristotle uses thought experiments for argumentative persuasion
and in places where, due to the obscure nature of the subject matter
or the counterintuitive nature of the thesis they are meant to
support, insight cannot be readily communicated by appeal to
observational facts” (Corcilius 2018, p. 73). With a few
exceptions that involved problems of motion, “the
scholastics” made no meaningful effort to transform their
hypothetical conclusions into specific knowledge about the physical
world. They did, however, assume that although these hypothetical
conclusions were naturally impossible, God could produce them
supernaturally if he wished. Special attention received also a class
of medieval thought experiments that does not rely on counterfactuals
but also depends on theological assumptions to study matters
non-theological, namely those thought experiments involving angels,
whose existence were affirmed at that time (see Perler 2008). Angels
are gone by now (see Clark 1992), but not thought experiments. While
most thought experiments involving angels have Christianity as their
context, there is evidence of the practice of thought experiments also
in the context of Islam and Judaism (see McGinnis 2018; Fisch 2019).
In fact, the case has been made “that Ibn Sina is the first
philosopher in the Aristotelian tradition, and thus perhaps the first
in Western philosophy overall, to try to identify the psychological
processes that go into postulating a hypothetical scenario. Ibn Sina
also exhibits an interest in accounting for why, and to what extent,
such psychological acts are thought to carry weight in our study of
nature” (Kukkonen 2014, p. 434).
Ernst Mach is commonly credited with introducing the word
“thought experiment” (
Gadankenexperiment
) and
thereby coining a term for philosophical discussion (most recently
Krauthausen 2015, p. 15). “ This view is incorrect, however!
[…] it can be substantiated that it was used […] already
in 1811” (Witt-Hansen 1976, p. 48; see also Buzzoni 2008, pp.
14–15; 61–65; Cohnitz 2008; Kühne 2005, pp.
92–224; Moue et al. 2006, p. 63). The conceptual history of
“thought experiment” goes back at least to the Danish
“Tankeexperiment,” as it was used by Hans-Christian
Ørsted. We can go back even further and find in the work of the
German philosopher-scientist Georg Lichtenberg (1742–1799) a
tacit theory of “experiments with thoughts and ideas.”
These experiments help to overcome habits of thought that can inhibit
scientific progress, and make possible an enlightened philosophy (see
Schildknecht 1990, pp. 21; 123–169; Schöne 1982).
Lichtenberg’s “aphoristic experiments” (see Stern
1963, pp. 112–126) reflect “that Lichtenberg’s
scientific preoccupations are the formal and thematic prolegomena to
his work as a literary artist” (Stern 1963, p. 126).
Lichtenberg’s reflections on thought experimentation resemble
those of Popper and Thomas S. Kuhn, and it is plausible to think of
him as one important figure of the very first period in the history of
philosophical inquiry into thought experiments (see Fehige and Stuart
2014).
Accordingly, the modern history of the philosophical investigation
into thought experiments can be divided into four stages: in the 18th
and 19th century the awareness of the importance of thought
experiments in philosophy and science emerges. In addition to
Lichtenberg, special mention should be made of Novalis (see Daiber
2001; Fehige 2013a), and Hans-Christian Ørsted. The topic
reemerges in a more systematic manner at the beginning of the 20th
century with little relation to the attempts made at the first stage.
The stakeholders of the second stage were Pierre Duhem, Mach, and
Alexius Meinong (see Duhem 1913, pp. 304–311; Mach, 1883, pp.
48–58, 1897 and 1905; Meinong 1907). A third stage, probably due
to the rediscovery of the importance of scientific practice for a
proper understanding of science, followed in the first part of the
second half of the 20th century. Again, the contributions of this
stage bear little relation to the two previous stages. While the third
period has seen a number of noteworthy contributions (Cole 1983; Dancy
1985; Dennett 1985; Fodor 1964; Helm; Gilbert 1985; Helm et al. 1985;
Krimsky 1973; McMullin 1985; Myers 1986; Poser 1984; Prudovsky 1989;
Rehder 1980a,b; Yourgrau 1962 and 1967), the protagonists of this
period were Alexandre Koyré, Kuhn and Popper. The ongoing
philosophical exploration of thought experiments began in the 1980s,
and marks the fourth stage. Arguably, it has been the most prolific
one of all four stages. With some very important sign-postings in
place (Horowitz and Massey (eds.) 1991; Sorensen 1992a, b, c; Wilkes
1988) the ongoing discussion took off in light of a debate between
James Robert Brown and John D. Norton (see for a concise statement of
each position Brown 2004; Norton 2004), which many have found useful
to establish a contrast with their own alternative accounts of thought
experiments. These views “represent the extremes of platonic
rationalism and classic empiricism, respectively” (Moue et al.
2006, p. 69). They will be described below.
4. Current Views on Thought Experiments
Recall the key epistemological challenge described in the
introduction: how can we learn about the real world through merely
thinking about imagined scenarios? This challenge sits at the center
of the discussion even though we must note that not all of the work
discussed below focuses on it directly. Still, this section describes
six views that can be seen as responding in some way to this
challenge: The Skeptical Objection, The Intuition-Based Account, The
Argument View, Conceptual Constructivism, Experimentalism, and The
Mental-Model Account.
4.1 The Skeptical Objection
Of course, particular thought experiments have been contested. But for
the most part, the practice of thought experiments in the sciences has
been cheerfully accepted. Pierre Duhem, the great historian of
physics, is almost alone in what has been understood as an outright
condemnation of scientific thought experiments (see Duhem 1913, pp.
304–311). A thought experiment is no substitute for a real
experiment, he claimed, and should be forbidden in science, including
science education. However, in view of the important role of actual
thought experiments in the history of physics — from
Galileo’s falling bodies, to Newton’s bucket, to
Einstein’s elevator — it is unlikely that anyone will feel
or should feel much sympathy for Duhem’s strictures. We hasten
to add that Buzzoni (2018) questions the validity of this reading of
Duhem, and argues that already Mach’s reception of Duhem’s
views suggests a more nuanced reading of Duhem’s position.
Philosophers can be as critical as Duhem when it comes to thought
experimenting in their own field (see Cohnitz 2006b; Peijnenburg;
Atkinson 2003; Thagard 2014; Sorensen 1992a, pp. 7–50; Stuart
2014; Wilson 2016). At least thought experiments in science, the
skeptic claims, can be tested by physical experiment. However, this is
clearly false, since frictionless planes and universes empty of all
material bodies cannot be produced in any laboratory. True, the
results of philosophical thought experiments cannot be even
approximately tested. But, skeptics say little about why thought
experiments enjoy such popularity in philosophy. We are inclined to
say that skeptics underestimate the importance of thought experiments
for the creative mind in any field.
Few are outright skeptics, however. Many take a more ambiguous stance.
Sören Häggqvist, for example, has developed a normative
model for philosophical thought experiments (see Häggqvist 1996
and 2009). Surprisingly, none of the commonly accepted philosophical
thought experiments satisfies his model. And the process of
identifying successful thought experiments is only the first step in
addressing the central epistemological challenge posed by thought
experiments. It gets much messier once we begin to ask exactly how
reliable “successful” thought experiments are. Granted,
there is some justice in worrying about the reliability of
philosophical thought experiments (see, e.g., Klee 2008). This might
be true for ethics (see Dancy 1985, Jackson 1992; Wilson 2016),
conceptual analysis (see Fodor 1964), and philosophy of mind: “A
popular strategy in philosophy is to construct a certain sort of
thought experiment I call intuition pump. […] Intuition pumps
are often abused, though seldom deliberately” (Dennett 1985, p.
12). The claim by Dennett and others is that thought experiments too
often rest on prejudice and faulty common sense; they are inherently
conservative, while real science will likely result in
highly-counterintuitive outcomes. Dennett believes that thought
experiments rest on naive “folk concepts,” which is why
they can be so misguided. It is far from clear that this is a fair
charge. Everything involved in Galileo’s thought experiment that
produced the principle of relativity could be called “folk
concepts.” If we are inside a ship and perform a number of
experiments, such as walking about, tossing a ball, watching birds fly
about, we could not tell whether we are at rest in port or sailing
over a smooth sea. The upshot is that nature behaves the same either
way; the laws of nature are the same in any inertial frame. This
result is profound and is still with us in Einstein’s
relativity, whether it is folk physics or not.
Frequently discussed is the skeptical challenge raised by Kathleen
Wilkes. She expresses a deep suspicion of scenarios such as Derek
Parfit’s people splitting like an amoeba (see Parfit 1987;
Gendler 2002a). Wilkes wants philosophy “to use science fact
rather than science fiction or fantasy” (Wilkes 1988, p. 1), and
therefore to refrain from using thought experiments because they are
“both problematic and positively misleading” (Wilkes 1988,
p. 2). She claims that thought experiments about personal identity in
particular often fail to provide the background conditions against
which the experiment is set (see Wilkes 1988, p. 7). She thinks we
would not know what to say if we encountered someone who split like an
amoeba. She insists that a legitimate thought experiment must not
violate the known laws of nature. We do agree with Wilkes that
underdetermination can be a problem. But instead of dismissing thought
experiments in philosophy we should consider it a crucial factor in
assessing the quality of a thought experiment (see Rescher 2005, pp.
9–14). The more detailed the imaginary scenario in the relevant
aspects, the better the thought experiment (see Brendel 2004, pp.
97–99; Häggqvist 1996, p. 28).
We also agree that the inferences drawn in thought experimenting are
highly problematic if the hypothetical scenario “is inadequately
described” (Wilkes 1988, p. 8). But Wilkes seems to think that
the lack of description is unavoidable, which supposedly amounts to a
reason against philosophical thought experiments on personal identity
because persons are not natural kinds. This makes it impossible to
fill in necessary information to make the thought experiment work
given its unavoidable underdetermination. Wilkes thinks that
“whenever we are examining the ranges of concepts that do not
pick on natural kinds, the problem of deciding what is or what is not
‘relevant’ to the success of the thought experiment is yet
more problematic than the same question as it arises in science; and,
unlike the scientific problem, it may not even have an answer in
principle” (Wilkes 1988, p. 15). She adds that scientific laws
— especially those describing biological kinds like human beings
— “are not disjoint and independent, detachable from one
another […]. They are interrelated, to varying degrees of
course” (Wilkes 1988, p. 29). This implies, for example, that
“a full psychophysiological account of the processes of human
perception must at some stage link up with part at least of linguistic
ability; for we typically see things under a certain description, and
that description may be a very sophisticated one” (Wilkes 1988,
p. 29). These considerations have her rule out experiments that
challenge the human monopoly of personhood. No thought experiment,
claims Wilkes, is well conceived if it involves non-human animals or
computers as persons. But also those thought experiments can be ruled
out which involve the “fission or fusion of humans”
because it is not theoretically possible. “The total impact of
the sum of laws that group us together as human beings (a natural kind
category) precludes our splitting into two […] or fusing with
someone else” (Wilkes 1988, p. 36).
One can ascertain here all too well the inherent difficulties in
thinking about personal identity and the limited benefit some thought
experiments might have for what is deemed the proper metaphysics of
personal identity. Nevertheless, good reasons have been given in
favour of the use of thought experiments about personal identity (see
Beck 2006; Kolak 1993; Hershenov 2008). We also feel that the problems
about thought experiments on personal identity reveal more about the
intricate nature of the subject than about the usefulness of
philosophical thought experiments. And, disregarding other
shortcomings in Wilkes’ skepticism (for further discussion of
Wilkes’ views see Beck 1992; Brooks 1994; Focquaert 2003;
Häggqvist 1996, pp. 27–34), her suggestion that thought
experimental scenarios would have to satisfy current scientific
knowledge about the relevant entities featured in a thought experiment
is highly implausible. We learn a great deal about the world and our
theories when we wonder, for instance, what would have happened after
the big bang if the law of gravity had been an inverse cube law
instead of an inverse square. Would stars have failed to form?
Reasoning about such a scenario is perfectly coherent and very
instructive, even though it violates a law of nature.
To some extent we should share Wilkes’s concern that thought
experimenting seems to be constrained only by relevant logical
impossibilities and what seems intuitively acceptable. This is indeed
problematic because intuitions can be highly misleading and relevant
logical impossibilities are fairly ungrounded if they cannot be
supplemented by relevant theoretical impossibilities based on current
science in order to avoid the jump into futile fantasy. But in order
to dismiss thought experimenting as a useful philosophical tool one
has to show that intuition cannot be a source of knowledge and that an
epistemic tool should be useless because there is a serious chance it
can fail. Timothy Williamson has argued that we should forget about
intuition as a cushion in the philosophical armchair (see Williamson
2004a,b, 2008, pp. 179–207, and 2009; see also Schaffer 2017).
The importance of intuitions in philosophy has been neglected in the
past (see Williamson 2004b, p. 109–110), and for too long
intuition didn’t receive the attention it deserves (see, e.g.,
DePaul and Ramsey (eds.) 1998). Besides the traditional divide between
empiricists, rationalists and skeptics, it is not only a very
non-uniform use of the word “intuition” that makes it
difficult to assess the progress of the last years of philosophical
inquiry about intuitions. The situation has been complicated by the
contributions of experimental philosophers on intuitions who add
different reasons to question their reliability (see for a careful
critique of those reasons: Ludwig 2007; see also Ludwig 2018).
Generally speaking, the reliability of intuitions has been challenged
on two grounds. One stems from an evolutionary explanation of the
capacity to intuit; another is due to experiments which supposedly
show the cultural relativity or racial and gender sensitivity of
intuitions (see, e.g., Buckwalter and Stich 2010): “…a
substantial list of philosophical intuitions vary across demographic
groups and…they are influenced by a number of
prima
facies
irrelevant factors…Some writers…have urged
that these findings justify a thoroughgoing skepticism about the use
of intuitions as evidence in philosophy…But we think this
conclusion is much too strong…” (Stich & Toba 2018,
p. 379). After all, knowledge without intuitions (if only common sense
assumptions) seems impossible.
The recent discussion of intuitions in epistemology has barely made an
impact on philosophical reflections about thought experiments. As far
as philosophical thought experiments are concerned, this is as it
should be, according to Williamson. In this respect George Bealer can
be cited in support of Williamson, because for Bealer the talk about
philosophical thought experiments reveals a conceptual confusion.
Philosophy, he claims, is about “rational intuitions” and
thought experiments can be only about “physical
intuitions” (see Bealer 1998, pp. 207–208, and 2002, p.
74). To many, this is an implausible claim based on a deeply
problematic “phenomenology of intuitions” resulting in a
strict separation of “rational intuitions” from
“physical intuitions”, on such grounds as an alleged
immutability of “rational intuitions”. There are good
reasons to believe that thought experiments appeal to intuitions in
order to give us new insights about different realms of investigation,
including philosophy. This kind of positive connection is what
Williamson has in mind when addressing the role of intuitions in
philosophical thought experiments like the famous Gettier cases, which
overnight found acceptance by the philosophical community in their aim
to refute the view that knowledge is justified true belief. While
Williamson expects “armchair methods to play legitimately a more
dominant role in future philosophy” (Williamson 2009, p. 126),
he thinks that “we should stop talking about intuition”
(Williamson 2004b, p. 152). This does not impress proponents of what
we call an intuition-based account of thought experiments, and
probably for good reasons, given the problems in Williamson’s
approach (see, e.g., Dohrn 2016; Ichikawa and Jarvis 2009; Schaffer
2017), and the empirical evidence in favour of the positive role that
intuitions can play in human cognition.
4.2 The Intuition–Based Account
What we term the “intuition–based account” of
thought experiments comes in a naturalistic version (see Brendel 2004;
Gendler 2007), and in a Platonic version (see Brown 1991a [2011]). We
begin with a discussion of the latter. Brown holds that in a few
special cases we do go well beyond the old empirical data to acquire a
priori knowledge of nature (see also Koyré 1968). Galileo
showed that all bodies fall at the same speed with a brilliant thought
experiment that started by destroying the then reigning Aristotelian
account. The latter holds that heavy bodies fall faster than light
ones (
H
>
L
). But consider Figure 6, in which a
heavy cannon ball (
H
) and light musket ball (
L
) are
attached together to form a compound object (
H
+
L
);
the latter must fall faster than the cannon ball alone. Yet the
compound object must also fall slower, since the light part will act
as a drag on the heavy part. Now we have a contradiction:
H
+
L
>
H
and
H
>
H
+
L
. That’s the end of Aristotle’s
theory. But there is a bonus, since the right account is now obvious:
they all fall at the same speed (
H
=
L
=
H
+
L
).
Figure 6.
Galileo: “I don’t
even have to look”
Brown claims this is a priori (though still fallible) knowledge of
nature, since there are no new data involved, nor is the conclusion
derived from old data. Moreover, is it some sort of logical truth (for
the latest and most technical challenge of this claim see Urbaniak
2012). This account of thought experiments can be further developed by
linking the a priori epistemology to accounts of laws of nature that
hold that laws are relations among objectively existing abstract
entities. It is thus a form of Platonism, not unlike Platonic accounts
of mathematics such as that urged by Kurt Gödel.
The two most often repeated arguments against this sort of Platonism
are: it does not identify criteria to distinguish good from bad
thought experiments, and it violates the principle of ontological
parsimony. These seem weak objections. Perhaps they find widespread
acceptance because Platonism seems to be unfashionable these days (see
Grundmann 2018), given the general popularity of various forms of
naturalism. If intuitions really do the job in a thought experiment,
the first objection is weak because neither rationalists nor
empiricists have a theory about the reliability of intuitions. So the
objection should be that intuitions probably just do not matter in
human cognition. However, there are good reasons to question the truth
of this claim (see Myers 2004). This is not to marginalize the
problems that arise when admitting intuitions as a source of knowledge
and justification, especially in philosophy (see Hitchcock 2012).
As for the second objection, the appeal to Occam’s razor is in
general problematic when it is employed to rule out a theory. Whatever
we eliminate by employing the principle of parsimony we can easily
reintroduce it by an inference to the best explanation (see Meixner
2000). And this is exactly what a Platonist contends his or her
Platonism about thought experimenting to be, while conceding that the
Platonic intuition appears miraculous. But are they really more
miraculous than sense perception, which seems similar in many respects
to Platonic intuition? One might want to say yes, because supposedly
we have no clue at all how Platonic intuition works but we do have
some idea about the nature of sense perception. We know that if an
object is far away it appears smaller in vision, and under certain
light conditions the same object can look quite different. However, is
it really impossible to state similar rules to capture the nature of
Platonic intuition? If you are drunk or lack attention you most
probably will not be very successful in intuiting anything of
philosophical value.
A review of the relevant psychological literature will reveal further
criteria that could be employed to identify good and bad conditions
for Platonic intuition while thought experimenting. Yet, proponents of
the naturalistic version of the intuition–based account wonder
how necessary Platonism is once this move is entertained in defence of
the reliability of intuitions (see Miščević 2004).
Elke Brendel defines intuitions as mental propositional attitudes
accompanied with a strong feeling of certainty. In her view, we can
tell two stories to make sense of their cognitive power and
plasticity. One story relates to our biological constitution and
evolutionary past. The other is about membership in specialized
communities. Brendel’s account raises many questions, but it is
difficult to resist its appeal. A universal set is appealing to anyone
not trained in logic because most things we are familiar with can come
in sets, such as books, tables, and philosophers. A set of all sets
seems intuitively plausible. The intuition disappears once you worked
yourself through the problems arising from the idea of a set of all
sets. Brendel is quick to insist that such relativity of our
intuitions doesn’t imply that they are cognitively useless.
Without intuitions, we probably wouldn’t have knowledge, and
thought experiments are sometimes the only way to access the
intuitions that guide us in our cognitive lives. (see Brendel
2004)
4.3 The Argument View
John D. Norton is the most influential advocate of what we call
“the argument view” of thought experiments (see Norton
1991, 1993, 1996, 2004a,b, 2008). Even though the argument view seems
to be a natural option for empiricists, it seems that most empiricists
find Norton’s argument view too strong. For this reason, many
participants in the debate about thought experiments place themselves
between the extremes of Norton and Brown, who function as useful foils
for apparently more moderate outlooks. Perhaps (with tongue in cheek)
they could agree with Bernard Shaw on the virtues of moderation, when
Shaw said of the typical member of the middle class that he is
moderately honest, moderately intelligent, and moderately faithful to
his spouse. Norton claims that any thought experiment is really a
(possibly disguised) argument; it starts with premises grounded in
experience and follows deductive or inductive rules of inference in
arriving at its conclusion. The picturesque features of any thought
experiment which give it an experimental flavour might be
psychologically helpful, but are strictly redundant. Thus, says
Norton, we never go beyond the empirical premises in a way to which
any empiricist would object.
There are three objections that might be offered against Norton.
First, his notion of argument is too vague. However, this might not be
the best objection: arguments can be deductive (which are perfectly
clear) or inductive. If the latter are unclear, the fault is with
induction, not with Norton’s argument view. Second, it is argued
that Norton simply begs the question: every real world experiment can
be rephrased as an argument, but nobody would say that real world
experiences are dispensable. The account does not address the
question: where do the premises come from? A thought experiment might
be an essential step in making the Norton-style reconstruction. Third,
a thought experiment that is presented in argument form loses its
typical force. The soft-point in Brown’s Platonism is linked to
the strength of Norton’s account because Norton claims that any
other view implies a commitment to “asking the oracle.”
“Imagine an oracle that claims mysterious powers but never
delivers predictions that could not be learned by simple inferences
from ordinary experience. We would not believe that the oracle had any
mysterious powers. I propose the same verdict for thought experiments
in science” (Norton 1996, pp. 1142–1143). Defenders of
empiricist alternatives deny this dispensability thesis. Brendel
(2018) offers a most comprehensive review of merits and perils of the
argument view.
4.4 Conceptual Constructivism
“Conceptual constructivism”, as we could call it, is among
the empiricist alternatives to the argument view. The position has
been taken up by Van Dyck (2003) to account especially for
Heisenberg’s ɣ-ray microscope; but also by Gendler (1998)
to makes sense of Galileo’s falling body thought experiment.
Gendler’s proposal was advanced in more general terms by
Camilleri (2014) in order to establish a firm middle ground between
the views of Norton and Brown. Conceptual constructivism was first
proposed by Thomas Kuhn (1964). He employs many of the concepts (but
not the terminology) of his well-known
Structure of Scientific
Revolutions
. On his view a well-conceived thought experiment can
bring on a crisis or at least create an anomaly in the reigning theory
and so contribute to paradigm change. Thought experiments can teach us
something new about the world, even though we have no new empirical
data, by helping us to re-conceptualize the world in a new way.
Accordingly, Fehige (2013b) entertains the option of conceptual
constructivism in form of a Neo-Kantian reading of Einstein’s
famous clock in the box thought experiment. This proposal is inspired
by Michael Friedman’s proposal to conceive of scientific
revolutions as times when a Kantian kind of natural philosophy plays a
major role in guiding scientists from one paradigm to another. The
work of Kuhn left us with a puzzle: if scientific rationality is
absolutely dependent on a paradigm, and if during scientific
revolutions one paradigm replaces another, not in degrees but like a
Gestalt switch, then this transition from one paradigm to the next
cannot be a matter of scientific rationality. Are scientific
revolutions irrational periods in the history of science? Not
necessarily, some kind of natural philosophy may guide the process.
Friedman has a Kantian natural philosophy in mind; his proposal did
not earn wide acceptance, but the problem remains (see Fisch
2017).
4.5 Experimentalism
What we might term “experimentalism” encompasses a wide
range of different approaches which all assume that thought
experiments are a “limiting case” of ordinary experiments.
Experimentalism was proposed first by Ernst Mach (1897 and 1905). He
defines experimenting in terms of its basic method of variation and
its capacity to destroy prejudices about nature. According to Mach,
experimenting is innate to higher animals, including humans. The
thought experiment just happens on a higher intellectual level but is
basically still an experiment. At the centre of thought experimenting
is a “Gedankenerfahrung”, an experience in thought. Such
an experience is possible because thought experiments draw from
“unwillkürliche Abbildungen von Tatsachen”
(non-arbitrary images of facts) acquired in past experiences of the
world. Some thought experiments are so convincing in their results
that an execution seems unnecessary; others could be conducted in a
real-world experiment, which is the most natural trajectory of a
scientific thought experiment. In any case thought experiments can
result in a revision of belief, thereby demonstrating their
significance for scientific progress. Mach also appreciates the
didactic value of thought experiments: they help us to realize what
can be accomplished in thinking and what cannot.
In the spirit of Mach, Roy A. Sorensen has offered an aspiring version
of experimentalism that accounts for thought experiments in science
and philosophy, and tackles many of the central issues of the topic.
Sorensen claims thought experiments are “a subset of unexecuted
experiments” (1992, p. 213). By their logical nature they are
paradoxes that aim to test modal consequences of propositions. The
origin of our capacity of thought experimentation is explained in
terms of Darwinian evolution (as in Genz 1999, pp. 25–29),
though the explanation has been criticized to be only little more than
a ‘just so story’ that fails, on a posteriori grounds, to
epistemically underwrite that capacity (see Maffie 1997). Others are
more optimistic (see Shepard 2008).
Experimentalism does not have to take a naturalistic turn as it does
in Sorensen’s case. In a number of contributions Marco Buzzoni
has defended a Neo-Kantian version of experimentalism (see Buzzoni
2004, 2007, 2008, 2011, 2011b, 2013, 2013b). Buzzoni (2008) argues for
the dialectical unity of thought experiments and real-world
experiments. Thought experiments and real-world experiments are
claimed to be identical on the “technological-operational”
level, and at least in science, one is impossible without the other:
without thought experiments there wouldn’t be real-world
experiments because we would not know how to put questions to nature;
without real-world experiments there wouldn’t be answers to
these questions or experience from which they could draw. Given the
many scientific thought experiments that cannot be realized in the
real-world, Buzzoni might be conflating thought experiments with
imagined experiments to be carried out in the real-world (see Fehige
2012, 2013b; and Buzzoni 2013b).
4.6 The Mental–Model Account
The last of the many accounts that emerged in the discussion about
thought experiments is what could be called the
“mental–model account”. It attracts the most
followers (see Andreas 2011; Bishop 1998; Cooper 2005; Gendler 2004;
Palmieri 2003; Nersessian 1992, 1993, 2007; McMullin 1985;
Miščević 1992 and 2007). When we conduct a thought
experiment, according to champions of this view, we manipulate a
mental model instead of the physical realm: “The general claim
is that in certain problem-solving tasks people reason by constructing
a mental model of the situations, events, and processes that in
dynamic cases can be manipulated through simulation” (Nersessian
2018, p. 319). Like physical models, mental models are
non-propositional in nature. This means first of all “that the
carefully crafted thought–experimental narrative focuses on the
construction of a model of a
kind
of situation and
manipulating that model through simulation affords epistemic access to
certain features of current representations in a way that manipulating
propositional representations using logical rules cannot”
(Nersessian 2018, pp. 319–320). A narrative functions as a kind
of user-manual for building the model, but it isn’t identical to
a thought experiment.
5. Going Forward
The mental–model approach is one of the most promising of all
the accounts the literature on thought experiments has to offer, and
this for several reasons. First, it does not seem to be much of a
stretch to draw connections to the intuition–based account. In
fact, intuitions maybe the missing link to connect the essentially
non-propositional activities surrounding mental models, on the one
hand, and the propositional aspects of thought experiments, on the
other. After all, thought experiments involve propositional reasoning,
and somehow the non-propositional and propositional aspects of thought
experiments must be linked in any account of thought experiments. This
is urgent insofar as thought experiments are credited with a
meaningful role in theory discovery and theory choice. Second, the
mental–model approach also allows for inclusion of important
elements of experimentalism and the argument–view. Thought
experiments are realized in the mind on mental models, and the method
of variation is employed such that the results of the experiment may
be subject to a careful reconstruction of propositional lines of
reasoning to submit it for careful assessment and critique. Fourth,
the mental–model approach enables us to bring an aspect into
focus that has been widely neglected in the discussion so far: the
bodily component of (thought) experiments. The exception is the work
of the late David Gooding (1992, 1993, 1994, and 1999). Fifth, in
critical engagement with such naturalistic proposals, those theories
of the body may be put to work that the philosophical school of
phenomenology has produced (see Fehige and Wiltsche 2013). To be
welcomed, therefore, is the entry of phenomenology into the discussion
on thought experiments (see Hopp 2014; Wiltsche 2018). Sixth, the
mental–model account also relates naturally to the most
intriguing discussions about the role of literary fiction in thought
experiments.
Some have placed “literary fiction on the level of thought
experiments” (Swirski 2007, p. 6). There are two readings of
such a claim. According to the first, some literary fiction may be of
cognitive power due to the fact that they are thought experiments. In
other words, we shouldn’t outright reject the idea that
literature can be of cognitive value. Dystopian novels such as
Orwell’s
1984
and Huxley’s
Brave New
World
are obvious examples. According to the second reading, the
power of thought experiments is partially a function of the narrative
that conveys it. The work of Novalis remains relevant for the
exploration of this link between narrative development and thought
experiment: experimental writing and experiments on imagined scenarios
go hand in hand; words and thoughts coincide; mind and matter are
entangled (see, e.g., Fehige 2013a) According to the
mental–model approach, both readings have a valid point.
Literary fiction and narratives of thought experiments can be powerful
in establishing mental models in such a way that we can even learn new
things about the world at times from the fictional elements of them.
The common denominator is the work on mental models each may
facilitate. It is in this context that an appreciation can grow for
Catherine Elgin’s theory of exemplification to argue against the
“valorization of truth in epistemology” (2004, p. 113).
This is also the place to consider Andras Kertesz (2015) work on
conceptual metaphor research in its relevance to the epistemological
puzzle that thought experiments pose.
Finally, eighth, mention could be made of visual reasoning in
mathematics, which often seems closely related to thought experiments.
The standard view of mathematics is that the one and only source of
evidence is a proof, and a proof is a derivation from axioms or first
principles. Let’s overlook the problem of where the first
principles come from. A simple example such as the following casts
doubt on the standard view.
Theorem:
1 + 2 + 3 + … + n = n
2
/2 + n/2
Proof: See Figure 7.
Figure 7.
Picture proof.
The proof works like this: Start at the top and work down, letting the
little squares represent numbers,
1 + 2 + 3 + 4 + 5
. The
total number of squares in the picture is equal to this sum. Notice
also that the numbers of squares is equal to a large square with sides
of length 5 that is cut in half along the diagonal, i.e.,
5
2
/2
, plus the shaded bits that were cut off by
the diagonal cut, i.e.,
5/2
. It is plausible to claim that
the diagram is a perfectly good proof of the theorem. One can
“see” complete generality in the picture. Even though it
only illustrates the theorem for
n = 5
, somehow we can see
that it works for every number, all infinitely many of them. The
diagram does not implicitly suggest a “rigorous” verbal or
symbolic proof. The regular proof of this theorem is by mathematical
induction, but the diagram does not correspond to an inductive proof
at all, since the key element in an inductive proof is the passage
from
n
to
n + 1
. The simple moral we could draw from
the example is just this: We can in special cases correctly infer
theorems from pictures, that is, from visualizable situations. There
is an intuition and from this intuition we can grasp the truth of the
theorem. (See Brown 1999 [2008].)
This assessment of the current situation is very rough and
speculative, though certainly not implausible. Of course, there are
challenges to such a vision of a greater synthesis of the many
different takes on thought experiments. For example, some see
additional support arising for the argument–view from computer
simulations (see Beisbart 2012). Others find that “computational
modeling is largely replacing thought experimenting, and the latter
will play only a limited role in future practice of science,
especially in the sciences of complex nonlinear, dynamical
phenomena” (see Chandrasekharan
et al.
2012, p. 239).
But, there are also proposals such as that by Marcus Schulzke (2014)
to think of video games philosophically as executable thought
experiments. Whatever the merits of this particular proposal, future
explorations of the relationship between computer simulations and
thought experiments can build on outcomes of closer inquiries into it
(see Behmel 2001, pp. 98–108; Di Paolo
et al
. 2000; El
Skaf and Imbert 2013; Lenhard 2011; Stäudner 1998; Lenhard 2018).
The work on the nature of the importance of scientific understanding
(see, e.g., Stuart 2018) will inform that exploration as much as the
fruits of continuing efforts to clarify the role of the imagination in
thought experiments (see, e.g., Meynell 2014; Stuart 2017 and
forthcoming (b)).
We conclude with an interesting, but still relatively unexplored issue
that concerns the relative importance of thought experiments in
different disciplines. Physics and philosophy use them extensively.
Chemistry, by contrast, seems to have few or none at all. Why is this
the case? Perhaps it is merely an historical accident that chemists
never developed a culture of doing thought experiments. Perhaps it is
tied to some deep feature of the discipline itself (see Snooks 2006).
Economics and history use thought experiments, but apparently not
anthropology. A good explanation would likely tell us a lot about the
structure of these disciplines.
Related to this is the question of the difference, if any, between
thought experiments in the sciences and those in philosophy. We have
assumed throughout this article that they are the same kind of thing.
Not everyone sees them this way, so perhaps it should be considered an
open question. On the one hand, philosophy and science seem to many to
be different kinds of activities. That might suggest that thought
experiments would differ in the two areas. On the other hand, there is
a huge difference between thought experiments within a single field,
e.g., Newton’s bucket attempts to establish absolute space while
Schrodinger’s cat aims to show QM as then understood to be
absurd. Is the difference between them less than the difference
between either of them and Searle’s Chinese Room or
Thomson’s violinist? The case one way or the other is not
obvious. Of course, there are differences between constructive and
destructive thought experiments, but this is true within any
discipline. Perhaps for now the default attitude ought to be that
there is no principle difference between scientific and philosophical
thought experiments. This should not be treated as a dogmatic
principle, but rather a stimulus to look deeper for important subtle
contrasts.
Bibliography
The number of papers, anthologies, and monographs has been growing
immensely since the beginning of the 1990s. It might be useful to
highlight that in existing literature, Kühne (2006) remains the
most substantial historical study on the philosophical exploration of
thought experiments. And Sorensen (1992) remains the most
comprehensive philosophical study of thought experiments. More than
other monographs both of these studies well exceed the author’s
own systematic contribution to what is widely considered the primary
epistemological challenge presented by thought experiments. Also, this
bibliography does not include the many (we count about eight) popular
books on thought experiments (like
Wittgenstein’s Beetle and
Other Classical Thought Experiments
by Martin Cohen); nor do we
list fiction that is related to the subject (like
The End of Mr.
Y
by Scarlett Thomas, or
God’s Debris
by Scott
Adams). Further, for undergraduate teaching purposes one might want to
consider
Doing Philosophy: An Introduction Through Thought
Experiments
(edited by Theodore Schick, Jr. and Lewis Vaughn,
fifth edition, 2012, Boston: McGraw Hill Higher Education). Moreover,
a number of philosophical journals have dedicated part or all of an
issue to the topic of thought experiments, including the
Croatian
Journal of Philosophy
(19/VII, 2007),
Deutsche Zeitschrift
für Philosophie
(1/59, 2011),
Informal Logic
(3/17,
1995),
Philosophica
(1/72, 2003),
Perspectives on
Science
(2/22, 2014),
Berichte zur
Wissenschaftsgeschichte
(1/38, 2015)), as well as
TOPOI
(4/38, 2019) and
HOPOS
(1/11, 2021). Furthermore, a companion
to thought experiments exists now:
The Routledge Companion to
Thought Experiments
was published in 2017, and an introduction to
thought experiments by Nenad Miščević:
Thought
Experiments
(Springer, 2021). Each includes substantial state of
the art reports. The bibliography that follows aims to list only
publications that address thought experiments as such. Not included
are the many specialized papers that discuss a particular thought
experiment in its systematic contribution to the discussion of a
particular issue (such as Putnam’s twin earth scenario to
support semantic externalism). An exception is made, of course, when
such work is cited.
Aligica, Paul D., and Anthony J. Evans, 2009, “Thought
Experiments, Counterfactuals and Comparative Analysis”,
The
Review of Austrian Economics
, 22: 225–239.
Andreas, Holger, 2011, “Zur Wissenschaftslogik von
Gedankenexperimenten”,
Deutsche Zeitschrift für
Philosophie
, 59: 75–91.
Arthur, Richard, 1999, “On Thought Experiments as A Priori
Science”,
International Studies in the Philosophy of
Science
, 13: 215–229.
Bailey, Cyril, 1950,
Lucretius on the Nature of Things
(translation of
De Rerum Naturae
), ninth reprint, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Batens, Diderik, 2008, “On Possibilities and Thought
Experiments”, in R. Almeder (ed.),
Rescher Studies
,
Heusenstamm: Ontos Verlag, 29–57.
Bealer, George, 1998, “Intuition and the Autonomy of
Philosophy”, in M. DePaul and W. Ramsey (eds.),
Rethinking
Intuition: The Psychology of Intuition & Its Role in Philosophical
Inquiry
, Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 201–239.
–––, 2002, “Modal Epistemology and the
Rationalist Renaissance”, in T. S. Gendler and J. Hawthorne
(eds.),
Conceivability and Possibility
, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 71–125.
Beck, Simon, 1992, “Should we Tolerate People who
Split?”,
Southern Journal of Philosophy
, 30:
1–17.
–––, 2006, “These Bizarre Fictions:
Thought Experiments, Our Psychology and Our Selves”,
Philosophical Papers
, 35: 29–54.
Becker, Alexander, 2018, “Thought Experiments in
Plato”, in M. T. Stuart et al. (eds.),
The Routledge
Companion to Thought Experiments
, London and New York: Routledge,
44–56.
Behmel, Albrecht, 2001,
Was sind Gedankenexperimente?
Kontrafaktische Annahmen in der Philosophie des Geistes – der
Turingtest und das Chinesische Zimmer
, Stuttgart: Ibidem.
Beisbart, Claus, 2012, “How can Computer Simulations Produce
New Knowledge?”,
European Journal for Philosophy of
Science
, 2: 395–434.
Belkin, Aron, and Tetlock, Philip E. (eds.), 1996,
World
Politics: Logical, Methodological, and Psychological
Perspectives
, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bishop, Michael, 1998, “An Epistemological Role for Thought
Experiments”, in N. Shanks (ed.),
Idealization IX:
Idealization in Contemporary Physics
, Amsterdam/Atlanta, GA:
Rodopoi, 19–33.
–––, 1999, “Why Thought Experiments are
Not Arguments”,
Philosophy of Science
, 66:
534–541.
Bokulich, Alisa, 2001, “Rethinking Thought
Experiments”,
Perspectives on Science
, 9:
285–307.
Boniolo, Giovanni, 1997, “On a Unified Theory of Models and
Thought Experiments in Natural sciences”,
International
Studies in Philosophy of Science
, 11: 121–142.
Borsboom, Denny, et al., 2002, “Functional Thought
Experiments”,
Synthese
, 130: 379–387.
Borstner, Bojan, and Gartner Smiljana (eds.), 2017,
Thought
Experiments between Nature and Society
, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK:
Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Brendel, Elke, 1999, “Gedankenexperimente als Motor der
Wissenschaftsdynamik”, in J. Mittelstraß (ed.),
Die
Zukunft des Wissens. XVIII. Deutscher Kongress für
Philosophie
, Konstanz: UVK, 785–792.
–––, 2004, “Intuition Pumps and the Proper
Use of Thought Experiments”,
Dialectica
, 58:
88–108.
–––, 2018, “The Argument View: Are Thought
Experiments Mere Picturesque Arguments?”, in M. T. Stuart et al.
(eds.),
The Routledge Companion to Thought Experiments
,
London and New York: Routledge, 281–293.
Brooks, David H. M., 1994, “The Method of Thought
Experiment”,
Metaphilosophy
, 25: 71–83.
Brown, James Robert, 1986, “Thought Experiments since the
Scientific Revolution”,
International Studies in the
Philosophy of Science
, 1: 1–15.
–––, 1991 [2011],
Laboratory of the Mind:
Thought Experiments in the Natural Sciences
, London: Routledge,
Second Edition.
–––, 1999 [2008],
Philosophy of Mathematics:
A Contemporary Introduction to the World of Proofs and Pictures
,
London and New York: Routledge, second edition.
–––, 2004, “Why Thought Experiments Do
Transcend Empiricism”, in C. Hitchcock (ed.),
Contemporary
Debates in the Philosophy of Science
, Malden, MA: Blackwell,
23–43.
–––, 2004b, “Peeking into Plato’s
Heaven”,
Philosophy of Science
, 71:
1126–1138.
–––, 2007, “Counter Thought
Experiments”,
Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement
61
, 82: 155–177.
–––, 2011, “Über das Leben im Labor
des Geistes”,
Deutsche Zeitschrift für
Philosophie
, 59: 65–73.
Bunzl, Martin, 1996, “The Logic of Thought
Experiments”,
Synthese
, 106: 227–240.
Buschlinger, Wolfgang, 1993,
Denkkapriolen.
Gedankenexperimente in Naturwissenschaften, Ethik und Philosophy of
Mind
, Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann.
Butkovic, Ana, 2007, “What is the Function of Thought
Experiments: Kuhn vs. Brown”,
Croatian Journal of
Philosophy
, VII: 63–67.
Buzzoni, Marco, 2004,
Esperimento Ed Esperimento Mentale
,
Milano: FrankoAngeli.
–––, 2007, “Zum Verhältnis zwischen
Experiment und Gedankenexperiment in den Naturwissenschaften”,
Journal for General Philosophy of Science
, 38:
219–237.
–––, 2008,
Thought Experiment in the Natural
Sciences
, Würzburg: Königshausen & Neumann.
–––, 2011, “Kant und das
Gedankenexperimentieren”,
Deutsche Zeitschrift für
Philosophie
, 59: 93–107.
–––, 2011b, “On Mathematical Thought
Experiments”,
Epistemologia: Italian Journal for Philosophy
of Science
, XXXIV: 61–88.
–––, 2013, “Thought Experiments from a
Kantian Point of View”, in M. Frappier et al. (ed.),
Thought
Experiments in Science, Philosophy, and the Arts
, New York and
London: Routledge, 90–106.
–––, 2013b, “On Thought Experiments and
the Kantian A Priori in the Natural Sciences: A Reply to Yiftach J. H.
Fehige”,
Epistemologia: Italian Journal for Philosophy of
Science
, XXXVI: 277–293.
–––, 2015, “Causality, Teleology, and
Thought Experiments in Biology”,
Journal for General
Philosophy of Science
, 46: 279–299.
–––, 2018, “Pierre Duhem and Ernst Mach on
Thought Experiments”,
HOPOS: The Journal of the
International Society for the History of Philosophy of Science
,
8: 1–27.
Camilleri, Kristian, 2012, “Toward a Constructivist
Epistemology of Thought Experiments in Science”,
Synthese
, 191: 1697–1716.
Cargile, James, 1987, “Definitions and
Counterexamples”,
Philosophy
, 62: 179–193.
Chandrasekharan, Sanjay et al, 2013, “Computational
Modeling: Is This the End of Thought Experiments in Science?”,
in M. Frappier et al. (eds.),
Thought Experiments in Philosophy,
Science, and the Arts
, London: Routledge, 239–260.
Clark, Stephen R. L., 1992, “Where have all the Angels
Gone?”,
Religious Studies
, 28: 221–234.
Clatterbuck, Hayley, 2013, “The Epistemology of Thought
Experiments: A Non-eliminativist, Non-platonic Account”,
European Journal for Philosophy of Science
, 3:
309–329.
Cohnitz, Daniel, 2002, “Modal Scepticism: Philosophical
Thought Experiments and Modal Epistemology”,
Vienna Circle
Yearbook
, 10: 281–296.
–––, 2006a,
Gedankenexperimente in der
Philosophie
, Paderborn: mentis.
–––, 2006b, “Poor Thought Experiments? A
Comment on Peijnenburg and Atkinson”,
Journal for General
Philosophy of Science
, 37: 373–392.
–––, 2008, “Ørsteds
Gedankenexperiment: Eine Kantianische Fundierung der
Infinitesmalrechnung? Ein Beitrag zur Begriffsgeschichte von
‘Gedankenexperiment’ und zur Mathematikgeschichte des
frühen 19. Jarhunderts”,
Kant-Studien
, 99:
407–433.
Cole, David, 1984, “Thought and Thought Experiment”,
Philosophical Studies
, 45: 431–444.
Cooper, Rachel, 2005, “Thought Experiments”,
Metaphilosophy
, 36: 328–347.
Corcilius, Klaus, 2018, “Aristotle and Thought
Experiments”, in M. T. Stuart et al. (eds.),
The Routledge
Companion to Thought Experiments
, London and New York: Routledge,
57–76.
Cowley, Robert (ed.), 1999,
What-If? The World’s Most
Foremost Military Historians Imagine What Might Have Been
, New
York: Putnam.
––– (ed.), 2001,
More What-If?: Eminent
Historians Imagine What Might Have Been
, New York: Putnam.
Crick, Nathan, 2004, “Conquering our Imagination: Thought
Experiments and Enthymemes in Scientific Argument”,
Philosophy and Rhetoric
, 37: 21–41.
Daiber, Jürgen, 2001,
Experimentalphysik des Geistes:
Novalis und das romantische Experiment
, Göttingen:
Vadenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Dancy, Jonathan, 1985, “The Role of Imaginary Cases in
Ethics”,
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly
, 66:
141–153.
Davenport, Edward A., 1983, “Literature as Thought
Experiment (On Aiding and Abetting the Muse)”,
Philosophy of
the Social Sciences
, 13: 279–306.
Davies, David, 2007, “Thought Experiments and Fictional
Narratives”,
Croatian Journal of Philosophy
, VII:
29–45.
De Baere, Benoit, 2003, “Thought Experiments, Rhetoric, and
Possible Worlds”,
Philosophica
, 72: 105–130.
De Mey, Tim, 2003, “The Dual Nature View of Thought
Experiments”,
Philosophica
, 72: 61–78.
–––, 2005a, “Remodeling the Past”,
Foundations of Science
, 10: 47–66.
–––, 2005b, “Tales of the Unexpected:
Incongruity-Resolution in Humour Comprehension, Scientific Discovery
and Thought Experimentation”,
Logic and Logical
Philosophy
, 14: 69–88.
–––, 2006, “Imagination’s Grip on
Science”,
Metaphilosophy
, 37: 222–239.
Dennett, Daniel C., 1984,
Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free
Will Worth Wanting
, Cambridge: MIT Press.
–––, 1991,
Consciousness Explained
, New
York: Little Brown.
–––, 1995, “Intuition Pumps”, in J.
Brockman (ed.),
The Third Culture
, New York et al.: Simon
& Schuster, 181–197.
–––, 2005,
Sweet Dreams
, Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
DePaul, Michael, and William Ramsey (eds.), 2002,
Rethinking
Intuition: The Psychology of Intuition & Its Role in Philosophical
Inquiry
, Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.
Diamond, Cora, 2002, “What if X Isn’t the Number of
Sheep? Wittgenstein and Thought-Experiments in Ethics”,
Philosophical Papers
, 31: 227–250.
Di Paolo, E. A. et al., 2000, “Simulation Models as Opaque
Thought Experiments”, in M. A. McCaskill et al. (eds.),
Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Artificial
Life
, Cambridge: MIT Press, 497–506.
Ducheyne, Steffen, 2006, “The Argument(s) for Universal
Gravitation”,
Foundations of Science
, 11:
419–447.
Duhem, Pierre, 1913,
La théorie physique son objet et
sa structure, 2
nd
edition, Paris:
Chevalier &
Rivière, used here in reprint of 1981, Paris: Librairie
Philosophique J. Vrin (translated by P. Weiner, 1960,
Aim and
Structure of Physical Theory
, Princeton: Princeton University
Press).
El Skaf, Rawad, and Cyrille Imbert, 2013, “Unfolding in the
Empirical Sciences: Experiments, Thought Experiments and Computer
Simulations”,
Synthese
, 190: 3451–3474.
Elgin, Catherine Z., 1993, “Understanding: Art and
Science”,
Synthese
, 95: 13–28.
–––, 1993b, “True Enough”, in Ernest
Sosa and Enrique Villanueva (eds.),
Epistemology: Philosophical
Issues: Volume 14
, Boston, MA: Blackwell Publishing,
113–131.
–––, 2007, “The Laboratory of the
Mind”, in J. Gibson (ed.),
A Sense of the World: Essays on
Fiction, Narrative and Knowledge
, Oxon: Routledge-Taylor Francis,
43–54.
–––, 2014, “Fiction as Thought
Experiment”,
Perspectives on Science
, 22:
221–241.
Fehige, Yiftach J. H., 2011, “Gedankenexperimente in der
Offenbarungstheologie? Eine erste Annäherung”,
Deutsche
Zeitschrift für Philosophie
, 59: 109–129.
–––, 2012, “Experiments of Pure Reason.
Kantianism and Thought Experiments in Science”,
Epistemologia: Italian Journal for Philosophy of Science
, 35:
141–160.
–––, 2013a, “Poems of Productive
Imagination: Thought Experiments, Theology, and Science in
Novalis”,
Neue Zeitschrift für Systematische Theologie
und Religionsphilosophie
, 55: 54–83.
–––, 2013b, “The Relativized A Priori and
the Laboratory of the Mind: Towards a Neo-Kantian Account of Thought
Experiments in Science”,
Epistemologia: Italian Journal for
Philosophy of Science
, 36: 55–63.
–––, 2018, “Thought Experiments and
Theology”, in M. T. Stuart et al. (eds.),
The Routledge
Companion to Thought Experiments
, London and New York: Routledge,
183–194.
–––, and Harald Wiltsche, 2013, “The Body,
Thought Experiments, and Phenomenology”, in M. Frappier et al.
(eds.),
Thought Experiments in Philosophy, Science, and the
Arts
, London: Routledge, 69–89.
–––, and Michael T. Stuart, 2014, “Origins
of the Philosophy of Thought Experiments: The Forerun”,
Perspectives on Science
, 22: 179–220.
Fisch, Menachem, 2017,
Creatively Undecided: Toward a History
and Philosophy of Scientific Agency
, Chicago: Chicago University
Press.
–––, 2019, “Gulliver and the Rabbis:
Counterfactual Truth in Science and the Talmud”,
Religions:
An Open Access Journal of Theology
,
https://doi.org/10.3390/rel10030228.
Focquaert, Farah, 2003, “Personal Identity and its
Boundaries: Philosophical Thought Experiments”,
Philosophica
, 72: 131–152.
Fodor, Jerry, 1964, “On Knowing What We Would Say”,
Philosophical Review
, 73: 198–212.
Frappier, Melanie, and Letitia Meynell, and James Robert Brown
(eds.), 2013,
Thought Experiments in Philosophy, Science, and the
Arts
, London: Routledge.
Fuhrer, Therese, 2007, “Der Geist im Vollkommenen
Körper: Ein Gedankenexperiment in Augustins De civitate
22”, in D. Frede and B. Reis (eds.),
Body and Soul in
Ancient Philosophy
, Berlin: de Gruyter, 465–491.
Gähde, Ulrich, 2000, “Gedankenexperimente in
Erkenntnistheorie und Physik: Strukturelle Parallelen”, in J.
Nida-Rümlin,
Rationalität, Realismus, Revision
,
Berlin: de Gruyter, 457–464.
Gendler, Tamar S., 1998, “Galileo and the Indispensability
of Scientific Thought Experiment”,
The British Journal for
the Philosophy of Science
, 49:397–424.
–––, 2000,
Thought Experiment: On the Powers
and Limits of Imaginary Cases
, New York: Garland Press (now
Routledge).
–––, 2002a, “Personal Identity and
Thought-Experiments”,
Philosophical Quarterly
, 52:
34–54.
–––, 2002b, “Thought Experiment”,
Encyclopedia of Cognitive Science
, New York; London:
Nature/Routledge.
–––, 2004, “Thought Experiments
Rethought— and Reperceived”,
Philosophy of
Science
, 71: 1152–1164.
–––, 2005, “Thought Experiments in
Science”,
Encyclopedia of Philosophy
, New York:
MacMillan.
–––, 2007, “Philosophical Thought
Experiments, Intuitions, and Cognitive Equilibrium”,
Midwest
Studies in Philosophy of Science
, 31: 68–89.
Gendler, Tamar S., and John Hawthorne (eds.), 2002,
Conceivability and Possibility.
New York/Oxford:
Clarendon/Oxford University Press.
Genz, Henning, 1999,
Gedankenexperimente
, Weinheim:
Wiley-VCH.
Georgiou, Andreas, 2007, “An Embodied Cognition View of
Imagery-Based Reasoning in Science: Lessons from Thought
Experiments”,
Croatian Journal of Philosophy
, VII:
29–45.
Glas, Eduard, 1999, “Thought Experimentation and
Mathematical Innovation”,
Studies in History and Philosophy
of Science
, 30: 1–19.
Gomila, Antoni, 1991, “What is a Thought Experiment?”,
Metaphilosophy
, 22: 84–92.
Gooding, David C., 1992, “The Cognitive Turn, or, Why Do
Thought Experiments Work?”, in R. N. Giere (ed.),
Cognitive
Models of Science
, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,
45–76.
–––, 1993, “What is Experimental About
Thought Experiments?”,
Proceedings of the Philosophy of
Science Association
, 2: 280–290.
–––, 1994, “Imaginary Science”,
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science
, 45:
1029–1045.
–––, 1999, “Thought Experiments”, in
E. Craig (ed.),
Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Volume 9
, London:
Routledge, 392–397.
Grant, Edward, 2007, “Thought Experiments and the Role of
the Imagination”, in
A History of Natural Philosophy: From
the Ancient World to Nineteenth Century
, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 200–211.
Gregersen, Niels H., 2014, “The Role of Thought Experiments
in Science and Religion”, in Michael Welker (ed.)
Science
and Religion: Past and Future
, Frankfurt/Main: Peter Lang,
129–140.
Grosdanoff, Boris, 2007, “Reconstruction, Justification and
Incompatibility in Norton’s Account of Thought
Experiments”,
Croatian Journal of Philosophy
, VII:
69–79.
Grundmann, Thomas, 2018, “Plato and the A Priori in Thought
Experiments”, in M. T. Stuart et al. (eds.),
The Routledge
Companion to Thought Experiments
, London and New York: Routledge,
293–308.
Grudmann, Thomas and Joachim Horvath, 2014, “Thought
Experiments and the Problem of Deviant Realisations”,
Philosophical Studies
, 170(3): 525–533.
Hacking, Ian, 1993, “Do Thought Experiments have a Life of
Their Own?”,
Proceedings of the Philosophy of Science
Association
, 2: 302–308.
Häggqvist, Sören, 1996,
Thought Experiments in
Philosophy
, Stockholm: Almqvist & Wiksell International.
–––, 2007, “The A Priori Thesis: A
critical Assessment”,
Croatian Journal of Philosophy
,
VII: 47–61.
–––, 2009, “A Model for Thought
Experiments”,
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
, 39:
56–76.
Hauerwas, Stanley, 1996,“Virtue, Description, and
Friendship: A Thought Experiment in Catholic Moral Theology”,
Irish Theological Quarterly
, 62: 170–184.
Helm, Hugh, and John Gilbert, 1985, “Thought Experiments and
Physics Education – Part 1”,
Physics Education
,
20: 124–131.
Helm, Hugh, and John Gilbert, and Michael D. Watts, 1985,
“Thought Experiments and Physics Education – Part
2”,
Physics Education
, 20: 211–217.
Herfeld, Catherine, 2019, “Imagination Rather Than
Observation in Econometrics: Ragnar Frisch’s Hypothetical
Experiments as Thought Experiments”,
HOPOS: The Journal of
the International Society for the History of Philosophy of
Science
, 9: 35–74.
Hershenov, David B., 2008, “A Hylomorphic Account of Thought
Experiments Concerning Personal Identity”,
American Catholic
Philosophical Quarterly
, 82: 481–502.
Hintikka, Jaakko, 1999, “The Emperor’s New
Intuitions”,
The Journal of Philosophy
, 96:
127–147.
Hitchcock, Christopher, 2012, “Thought Experiments, Real
Experiments, and the Expertise Objection”,
European Journal
for Philosophy of Science
, 2: 205–218.
Hopp, Walter, 2014, “Experiments in Thought”,
Perspectives on Science
, 22: 242–263.
Horowitz, Tamara, 1998, “Philosophical Intuitions and
Psychological Theory”,
Ethics
, 108: 367–385.
Horowitz, Tamara, and Gerald Massey (eds.), 1991,
Thought
Experiments in Science and Philosophy
, Lanham: Rowman &
Littlefield.
Humphreys, Paul, 1993, “Seven Theses on Thought
Experiments”, in J. Earman
et al
. (eds.),
Philosophical Problems of the Internal and External World
,
Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press, 205–227.
Ichikawa, Jonathan, and Benjamin Jarvis, 2009,
“Thought-experiment Intuition and truth in Fiction”,
Philosophical Studies
, 142: 221–246.
Ierodiakonou, Katerina, 2005, “Ancient Thought Experiments:
A First Approach”,
Ancient Philosophy
, 25:
125–140.
–––, 2018, “The Triple Life of Ancient
Thought Experiments”, in M. T. Stuart et al. (eds.),
The
Routledge Companion to Thought Experiments
, London and New York:
Routledge, 31–43.
Ierodiakonou, Katerina, and Sophia Roux (eds.), 2011,
Thought
Experiments in Methodological and Historical Contexts
, Leiden:
Brill.
Inwagen, Peter van, 1998, “Modal Epistemology”,
Philosophical Studies
, 92: 67–84.
Irvine, Andrew D., 1991, “Thought Experiments in Scientific
Reasoning”, in T. Horowitz and G. Massey (eds.),
Thought
Experiments in Science and Philosophy
, Lanham: Rowman &
Littlefield, 149–166.
Jackson, Frank, 1982, “Epiphenomenal Qualia”,
Philosophical Quarterly
, 32: 27–36.
–––, 2009, “Thought Experiments and
Possibilities”,
Analysis
, 69: 100–109.
Jackson, M. W., 1992, “The
Gedankenexperiment
Method of Ethics”,
The Journal of Value Inquiry
, 26:
525–535.
Janis, Allen I., 1991, “Can Thought Experiments
Fail?”, in T. Horowitz and G. Massey (eds.),
Thought
Experiments in Science and Philosophy
, Lanham: Rowman &
Littlefield, 113–118.
Kalin, Martin G., 1972, “Kant’s Transcendental
Arguments as Gedankenexperimente”,
Kant Studien
, 63:
315–328.
Kassung, Christian, 2004, “Tichy · 2 = ?:
Relativitätstheorie als literarisches Gedankenexperiment”,
in T. Macho and A. Wunschel (eds.),
Science & Fiction
,
Frankfurt am Main: Fischer, pp. 17–32.
Kertesz, Andras, 2015, “The Puzzle of Thought Experiments in
Conceptual Metaphor Research”,
Foundations of Science
,
20: 147–174.
King, Peter, 1991, “Mediaeval Thought-Experiments: The
Metamethodology of Mediaeval Science”, in T. Horowitz and G.
Massey (eds.),
Thought Experiments in Science and Philosophy
,
Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 43–64.
Klassen, Stephen, 2006, “The Science Thought Experiment: How
Might it be Used Profitably in the Classroom?”,
Interchange
, 37: 77–96.
Klee, Robert, 2008, “Physical Scale Effects and
Philosophical Thought Experiments”,
Metaphilosophy
, 39:
89–104.
Knox, Philip, and Jonathan Morton, and Daniel Reeve (eds.), 2018,
Medieval Thought Experiments: Poetry, Hypothesis, and Experience
in the European Middle Ages
, Turnhout, Belgium : Brepols.
Kolak, Daniel, 1993, “Metaphysics and Metapsychology of
Personal Identity: Why Thought Experiments Matter in Deciding Who We
Are”,
American Philosophical Quarterly
, 30:
39–50.
Koyré, Alexandre, 1968,
Metaphysics and
Measurement
, London: Chapman and Hall.
Krauthausen, Karin, 2015, “Ermittlung der Empirie: Zu Ernst
Machs Methode des Gedankenexperiments”,
Berichte zur
Wissenschaftsgeschichte
, 38: 15–40.
Krimsky, Sheldon, 1973, “The Use and Misuse of Critical
Gedankenexperimente”,
Zeitschrift für allgemeine
Wissenschaftstheorie
, 4: 323–334.
Kuhn, Thomas S., 1964, “A Function for Thought
Experiments”, reprinted in T. Kuhn,
The Essential
Tension
, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1977,
240–265.
Kühne, Ulrich, 2005,
Die Methode des
Gedankenexperiments
, Frankfurt: Suhrkamp.
Kujundzic, Nebojsa, 1995, “Thought Experiments: Architecture
and Economy of Thought”,
The Journal of the British Society
for Phenomenology
, 26: 86–93.
–––, 1998, “The Role of Variation in
Thought Experiments”,
International Studies in the
Philosophy of Science
, 12: 239–243.
–––, 2013, “Thought Experiments, Puzzles,
and Paradoxes”,
Philosophy Study
, 3:
750–758.
Kukkonen, Taneli, 2014, “Ibn Sina and the Early History of
Thought Experiments”,
Journal of the History of
Philosophy
, 53: 433–453.
Laymon, Ronald, 1991, “Thought Experiments of Stevin, Mach
and Gouy: Thought Experiments as Ideal Limits and as Semantic
Domains”, in T. Horowitz and G. Massey (eds.),
Thought
Experiments in Science and Philosophy
, Lanham: Rowman &
Littlefield, 167–192.
Lenhard, Johannes, 2011, “Epistemologie der Iteration:
Gedankenexperimente und Simulationsexperimente”,
Deutsche
Zeitschrift für Philosophie
, 59: 131–154.
Lennox, James G., 1991, “Darwinian Thought Experiments: A
Function for Just-So Stories”, in T. Horowitz and G. Massey
(eds.),
Thought Experiments in Science and Philosophy
,
Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 223–245.
Ludwig, Kirk, 2007, “The Epistemology of Thought
Experiments: First Person versus Third Person Appraoches”,
Midwest Studies in Philosophy
, 31: 128–159.
–––, 2018, “Thought Experiments and
Experimental Philosophy”, in M. T. Stuart et al. (eds.),
The
Routledge Companion to Thought Experiments
, London and New York:
Routledge, 385–405.
Maar, Alexander, 2014, “Possible Uses of Counterfactual
Thought Experiments in History”,
Principia
, 18:
87–113.
Mach, Ernst, 1883,
Die Mechanik in ihrer Entwicklung:
Historisch-Kritisch Dargestellt
, seventh edition, used here in
reprint of 1988, Berlin; Akademie Verlag (trans. by J. McCormack,
The Science of Mechanics
, LaSalle Illinois: Open Court).
–––, 1897, “Über
Gedankenexperimente”, in:
Zeitschrift für den
physikalischen und chemischen Unterricht
, 10: 1–5.
–––, 1905, “Über
Gedankenexperimente”, in
Erkenntnis und Irrtum
,
Leipzig: Verlag von Johann Ambrosius Barth, 181–197, (translated
by J. McCormack, in
Knowledge and Error
, Dordrecht: Reidel,
134–147).
Macho, Thomas, and Anette Wunschel (eds.), 2004,
Science and
Fiction:Über Gedankenexperimente in Wissenschaft, Philosophie und
Literatur
, Frankfurt am Main: Fischer Verlag.
Machery, Edouard, 2011,“Thought Experiments and
Philosophical Knowledge”,
Metaphilosophy
, 42:
191–214.
Maffie, James, 1997, “Just-so Stories about ‘Inner
Cognitive Africa’: Some Doubts about Sorensen’s
Evolutionary Epistemology of Thought Experiments”,
Biology
and Philosophy
, 12: 207–224.
Malmgren, Anna-Sara, 2011, “Rationalism and the Content of
Intuitive Judgements”,
Mind
, 120: 263–327.
Massey, Gerald, 1991, “Backdoor Analyticity”, in T.
Horowitz and G. Massey (eds.),
Thought Experiments in Science and
Philosophy
, Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield, 285–296.
Mayer, Verena, 1999, “Was zeigen
Gedankenexperimente?”,
Philosophisches Jahrbuch
, 106:
357–378.
McAllister, James, 1996, “The Evidential Significance of
Thought Experiments in Science”,
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science
, 27: 233–250.
–––, 2004, “Thought Experiments and the
Belief in Phenomena”,
Proceedings of the 2002 Biennial
Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association, Philosophy of
Science
, 71: 1164–1175.
–––, 2005, “The Virtual Laboratory:
Thought Experiments in Seventeenth-Century Mechanics”, in H.
Schramm et al. (eds.),
Collection, Laboratory, Theater: Scenes of
Knowledge in the 17th Century
, New York: Walter de Gruyter,
35–56.
McComb, Geordie, 2013, “Thought Experiment, Definition, and
Literary Fiction”, in M. Frappier et al. (eds.),
Thought
Experiments in Philosophy, Science, and the Arts
, London:
Routledge, 207–222.
McGinnis, Jon, 2018, “Experimental Thoughts on Thought
Experiments in Medieval Islam”, in Michael T. Stuart et al.
(eds.),
The Routledge Companion to Thought Experiments
,
London and New York: Routledge, 77–91.
McMullin, Ernan, 1985, “Galilean Idealization”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of Science
, 16:
247–273.
Meinong, Alexius, 1907, “Das Gedankenexperiment”, in
Über die Stellung der Gegenstandstheorie im System der
Wissenschaften
(reprinted in the fifth volume of the collected
works of Meinong, edited by Rudolf Haller and Rudolf Kindinger,
Graz-Austria: Akademische Druck und Verlagsanstalt, 1973,
273–283 [67–77]).
Meixner, Uwe, 2000, “On Some Realisms Most Realists
Don’t Like”,
Metaphysica
, 1: 73–94.
Malament, David B., 2008, “Norton’s Slippery
Slope”,
Philosophy of Science
, 75: 799–818.
Meynell, Letitia, 2014, “Imagination and Insight: A new
Acount [sic!] of the Content of Thought Experiments”,
Synthese
, 191: 4149–4168.
Milligan, Tony, 2019, “Thought Experiments and
Novels”,
Studia Humana
, 8: 84–92.
Miščević, Nenad, 1992, “Mental Models and
Thought Experiments”,
International Studies in the
Philosophy of Science
, 6: 215–226.
–––, 1997, “Categorial and Essentialist
Intuitions: A Naturalist Perspective”,
Acta Analytica
,
12: 21–39.
–––, 2004, “The Explainability of
Intuitions”,
dialectica
, 58: 43–70.
–––, 2007, “Modelling Intuitions and
Thought Experiments”,
Croatian Journal of Philosophy
,
VII: 181–214.
Morrison, Margaret, 2009, “Models, Measurements, and
Computer Simulations: the Changing Face of Experimentation”,
Philosophical Studies
, 143: 33–57.
Moue, Aspasia S. et al., 2006, “Tracing the Development of
Thought Experiments in the Philosophy of the Natural Sciences”,
Journal for General Philosophy of Science
, 37:
61–75.
Myers, Mason C., 1968, “Thought Experiments and Secret
Stores of Information”,
International Philosophical
Quarterly
, 8: 180–192.
–––, 1986, “Analytical Thought
Experiments”,
Metaphilosophy
, 17: 109–118.
Myers, David G., 2004),
Intuition. Its powers and perils
,
New Haven; London: Yale University Press.
Nersessian, Nancy, 1992, “How Do Scientists Think? Capturing
the Dynamics of Conceptual Change in Science”, in R. Giere
(ed.),
Cognitive Models of Science
, Minneapolis: University
of Minnesota Press, 3–44.
–––, 1993, “In the Theoretician’s
Laboratory: Thought Experimenting as Mental Modeling”,
Proceedings of the Philosophy of Science Association
, 2:
291–301.
–––, 2007, “Thought Experiments as Mental
Modelling: Empiricism without Logic”,
Croatian Journal of
Philosophy
, VII: 125–161.
–––, 2018, “Cognitive Science, Mental
Models, and Thought Experiments”, in Michael T. Stuart et al.
(eds.),
The Routledge Companion to Thought Experiments
,
London and New York: Routledge, 309–326.
Norton, John D., 1991, “Thought Experiments in
Einstein’s Work”, in T. Horowitz and G. Massey (eds.),
Thought Experiments in Science and Philosophy
, Lanham: Rowman
& Littlefield, 129–148.
–––, 1993, “Einstein and Nordström:
Some lesser known Thought Experiments in Gravitation”, in J.
Earman et al. (eds.),
The Attraction of Gravitation: New Studies
in History of General Relativity
, Boston: Birkhäuser,
3–29.
–––, 1993b, “Seeing the Laws of
Nature”,
Metascience
, 3:33–38.
–––, 1996, “Are Thought Experiments Just
What You Thought?”,
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
, 26:
333–366.
–––, 2004a, “On Thought Experiments: Is
There More to the Argument?”
Proceedings of the 2002
Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Association, Philosophy
of Science
, 71: 1139–1151.
 [
Preprint available online
].
–––, 2004b, “Why Thought Experiments Do
Not Transcend Empiricism”, in C. Hitchcock (ed.),
Contemporary Debates in the Philosophy of Science
, Oxford:
Blackwell, 44–66.
 [
Preprint available online
].
–––, 2008, “The Dome: An Unexpectedly
Simple Failure of Determinism”,
Philosophy of Science
,
75: 786–798.
Palmer, Anthony, 1984, “The Limits of AI: Thought
Experiments and Conceptual investigations”, in S. Torrance
(ed.),
The Mind and the Machine: Philosophical Aspects of
Artificial Intelligence
, Chichester: Ellis Horwood, pp.
43–50.
Palmieri, Paolo, 2003, “Mental Models in Galileo’s
Early Mathematization of Nature”,
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science
, 34: 229–264.
–––, 2005, “‘Spuntur lo scoglio
più duro’: Did Galileo Ever Think the Most Beautiful
Thought experiment in the History of Science?”,
Studies in
History and Philosophy of Science
, 36: 305–322.
Parfit, Derek, 1987,
Reasons and Persons
, Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Peijnenburg, Jeanne, and David Atkinson, 2003, “When are
Thought experiments Poor Ones?”,
Journal for General
Philosophy of Science
, 34: 305–322.
–––, 2007, “On poor and not so Poor
Thought experiments: A reply to Daniel Cohnitz”,
Journal for
General Philosophy of Science
, 38: 159–161.
Perler, Dominik, 2008, “Thought Experiments: The
Methodological Function of Angels in Late Medieval
Epistemology”, in Isabel Iribarren and Markus Lenz (eds.),
Angels in Medieval Philosophical Inquiry
, Aldershot: Ashgate,
143–153.
Picha, Marek, 2011,
Kdyby chyby. Epistemologie
myšlenkových experimentů
, Olomouc:
Nakladatelství Olomouc.
Popper, Karl, 1959, “On the Use and Misuse of Imaginary
Experiments, especially in Quantum Theory”, in
The Logic of
Scientific Discovery
, London: Hutchinson, 442–456.
Poser, Hans, 1984, “Wovon handelt ein
Gedankenexperiment?”, in H. P. Poser and H.-W. Schütt
(eds.),
Ontologie und Wissenschaft. Philosophische und
wissenschaftliche Untersuchungen zur Frage der
Objektkonstruktion
, Berlin: TUB-Dokumentationen, Issue 19:
181–198.
Praem, Sara Kier, and Asbjorn Steglich–Petersen, 2015,
“Philosophical Thought Experiments as Heuristics for Theory
Discovery”,
Synthese
, 192: 2827–2842.
Prudovsky, Gad, 1989, “The Confirmation of the Superposition
Principle: The Role of a Constructive Thought Experiment in
Galileo’s
Discorsi”
,
Studies in History and
Philosophy of Science
, 20: 453–468.
Pulte, Helmut, 2007, “Gedankenexperiment und Physikalisches
Weltbild: Überlegungen zur Bildung von Naturwissenschaft und zur
naturwissenschaftlichen Bildung im Anschluss an A. Einstein”, in
Die Kultur moderner Wissenschaft am Beispiel Albert Einstein
,
München: Akademie Verlag, 39–68.
Puskaric, Ksenija, 2007, “Brown and Berkeley”,
Croatian Journal of Philosophy
, VII: 177–180.
Rehder, Wulf, 1980a, “Thought Experiment and Modal
Logic”,
Logique et Analyse
, 23: 407–417.
–––, 1980b, “Versuche zu einer Theorie von
Gedankenexperimenten”,
Grazer Philosophische Studien
,
11: 105–123.
Reiss, Julian, 2009, “Counterfactuals, Thought Experiments
and Singular Causal Inference in History”,
Philosophy of
Science
, 76: 712–723.
–––, 2013, “Genealogical Thought
Experiments in Economics”, in M. Frappier et al. (eds.),
Thought Experiments in Philosophy, Science, and the Arts
,
London: Routledge, 177–190.
Rescher, Nicholas, 1991, “Thought Experiments in Presocratic
Philosophy”, in T. Horowitz and G. Massey (eds.),
Thought
Experiments in Science and Philosophy
, Lanham: Rowman &
Littlefield, 31–42.
–––, 2003,
Imagining Irreality
,
Chicago; La Salle: Open Court.
–––, 2005,
What If?: Thought Experimentation
in Philosophy
, New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers.
Roberts, Francis, 1993, “Thought Experiments and Social
Transformation”,
Journal for the Theory of Social
Behaviour
, 23: 399–421.
Robinson, Howard, 2004, “Thought Experiments, Ontology and
Concept-Dependent Truthmakers”,
Monist
, 87:
537–553.
Saam, Nicole J., 2017, “What is a Computer Simulation? A
Review of a Passionate Debate”,
Journal for General
Philosophy of Science
, 48: 293–309.
Saint-Germier, Pierre, forthcoming, “Getting Gettier
Straight: Thought Experiments, Deviant Realizations and Default
Interpretations”,
Synthese
.
Schabas, Margaret, 2008, “Hume’s Monetary Thought
Experiments”,
Studies in History and Philosophy of
Science
, 39: 161–168.
Schildknecht, Christiane, 1990,
Philosophische Masken:
Literarische Formen der Philosophie bei Platon, Descartes, Wolff und
Lichtenberg
, Stuttgart: Metzler.
Schlesinger, George N., 1995, “The Power of Thought
Experiments”,
Foundations of Physics
, 26:
467–482.
Schöne, A., 1982,
Aufklärung aus dem Geist der
Experimentalphysik: Lichtenbergsche Konjunktive
, München: C.
H. Beck.
Schrödinger, E., 1935, “The Present Situation in
Quantum Mechanics”, trans in J. Wheeler and W. Zurek (eds.),
Quantum Theory and Measurement
, Princeton: Princeton
University Press.
Schulzke, Marcus, 2014, “Simulating Philosophy: Interpreting
Video Games as Executable Thought Experiments”,
Philosophy
and Technology
, 27: 251–265.
Shafer, Michael J., 2017, “’Filling In’, Thought
Experiments and Intuitions”,
Episteme
, 14:
255–262.
Shepard, Roger N., 2008, “The Step to Rationality: The
Efficacy of Thought Experiments in Science, Ethics, and Free
Will”,
Cognitive Science
, 32: 3–335.
Snooks, R. J., 2006, “Another Scientific Practice Separating
Chemistry from Physics”,
Foundations of Chemistry
, 8:
255–270.
Sorensen, Roy A., 1992a,
Thought Experiments
, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
–––, 1992b, “Thought Experiments and the
Epistemology of Laws”,
Canadian Journal of Philosophy
,
22: 15–44.
–––, 1992c, “Moral Dilemmas, Thought
Experiments, and Concept Vagueness”,
Philosophical
Studies
, 63: 291–308.
–––, 2011, “Das Chinesische
Musikzimmer”,
Deutsche Zeitschrift für
Philosophie
, 59: 61–63.
Souder, Lawrence, 2003, “What are we to think about Thought
Experiments?”,
Argumentation: An International Journal on
Reasoning
, 17: 203–217.
Sriraman, Bharath, 2006, “An Ode to Imre Lakatos:
Quasi-Thought Experiments to Bridge the Ideal and Actual Mathematics
Classrooms”,
Interchange
, 37: 151–178.
Starikova, Irina, 2007, “Proofs and Pictures”,
Croatian Journal of Philosophy
, VII: 81–92.
Stern, J. P., 1963,
Lichtenberg: A Doctrine of Scattered
Occassions
, London: Thames and Hudson.
Stich, Stephen, and Kevin Toba, 2018, “Intuition and Its
Critics”, in M. T. Stuart et al. (eds.),
The Routledge
Companion to Thought Experiments
, London and New York: Routledge,
369–384.
Stinner, Arthur, 1990, “Philosophy, Thought Experiments, and
Large Context Problems in the Secondary Physics Course”,
International Journal of Science Education
, 12:
244–157.
Stöltzner, Michael, 2003, “The Dynamics of Thought
Experiments-Comment to Atkinson”, in M. Galavotti (ed.),
Observation and Experiment in the Natural and Social
Sciences
, Kluwer: Dordrecht, 2003, 243–258.
Stuart, Michael T., 2014, “Cognitive Science and Thought
Experiments: A Refutation of Paul Thagard’s Skepticism”,
Perspectives on Science
, 22: 264–287.
–––, 2016, “Taming theory with Thought
Experiments: Understanding and Scientific Progress”,
Studies
in History and Philosophy of Science
, 58: 24–33.
–––, 2016b, “Norton and the Logic of
Thought Experiments”,
Axiomathes
, 26:
451–466.
–––, 2017, “Imagination: A Sine Qua Non of
Science”,
Croatian Journal of Philosophy
, XVII:
9–32.
–––, 2018, “How Thought Experiments
Increase Understanding”, in M. T. Stuart et al. (eds.),
The
Routledge Companion to Thought Experiments
, London and New York:
Routledge, 526–544.
–––, forthcoming,
Thought Experiments
,
in
The Palgrave Encyclopedia of the Possible
.
–––, forthcoming (b), “Towards a Dual
Process Epistemology of Imagination”,
Synthese
.
Stuart, Michael T., Yiftach Fehige, and James R. Brown (eds.),
2018,
The Routledge Companion to Thought Experiments
, London
and New York: Routledge.
Swirski, Peter, 2007,
Of Literature and Knowledge:
Explorations in Narrative Thought Experiments, Evolution and Game
Theory
, London & New York: Routledge.
Taliaferro, Charles, 2001, “Sensibility and Possibilia: A
Defense of Thought Experiments”,
Philosophia Christi
,
3: 403–420.
–––, and Elliot Knuths, 2017, “Thought
Experiments in Philosophy of Religion: The Virtues of Phenomenological
Realism and Values”,
Open Theology
, 3:
167–173.
Tetlock, Philip E. et al. (eds.), 2009,
Unmaking the West:
What-If? Scenarios That Rewrite World History
, Ann Arbor:
University of Michigan Press.
Thagard, Paul, 2014, “Thought Experiments Considered
Harmful”,
Perspectives on Science
, 22:
288–305.
Thaler, Mathias, 2016, “Unhinged Frames: Assessing Thought
Experiments in Normative Political Theory”,
British Journal
of Political Science
, 48: 1119–1141.
Thoma, Johanna, 2016, “On the Hidden Thought Experiments of
Economic Theory”,
Philosophy of the Social Sciences
,
46: 129–146.
Thomson, Judith Jarvis, 1971, “A Defense of Abortion”,
Philosophy and Public Affairs
, 1: 47–66.
Urbaniak, Rafal, 2012, “”Platonic“ Thought
Experiments: How on Earth?”,
Synthese
, 187:
731–752.
Urbaniec, Jacek, 1988, “In Search of a Philosophical
Experiment”,
Metaphilosophy
, 19: 294–306.
Van Bendegem, Jean Paul, 2003, “Thought Experiments in
Mathematics: Anything But Proof”,
Philosophica
, 72:
9–33.
Van Dyck, Maarten, 2003, “The Roles of One Thought
Experiment in Interpreting Quantum Mechanics: Werner Heisenberg Meets
Thomas Kuhn”,
Philosophica
, 72: 1–21.
Walsh, Adrian, 2011, “A Moderate Defence of the Use of
Thought Experiments in Applied Ethics”,
Ethical Theory and
Moral Practice
, 14: 467–481.
Weber, Erik, and Tim DeMey, 2003, “Explanation and Thought
Experiments in History”,
History and Theory
, 42:
28–38.
Wilkes, Kathleen V., 1988,
Real People: Personal Identity
without Thought Experiments
, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Williamson, Timothy, 2004a, “Armchair Philosophy,
Metaphysical Modality and Counterfactual Thinking”,
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society
, CV: 1–23.
–––, 2004b, “Philosophical
‘Intuitions’ and Scepticism about Judgement”,
dialectica
, 58: 109–153.
–––, 2008,
The Philosophy of
Philosophy
, Malden, MA, et al: Blackwell.
–––, 2009, “Replies to Kornblinth, Jackson
and Moore 1”,
Analysis
, 69: 125–135.
Wilson, James, 2016, “VII–Internal Validity and
External Validity in Thought Experiments”,
Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society
, CXVI: 127–152.
Wiltsche, Harald, 2018, “Phenomenology and Thought
Experiments: Thought Experiments as Anticipation Pumps”, in M.
T. Stuart et al. (eds.),
The Routledge Companion to Thought
Experiments
, London and New York: Routledge, 342–365.
Winchester, Ian, 1990, “Thought Experiments and Conceptual
Revision”,
Studies in Philosophy and Education
, 10:
73–80.
Witt-Hansen, Johannes, 1976, “H. C. Orsted, Kant and The
Thought Experiment”,
Danish Yearbook of Philosophy
, 13:
48–56.
Ylikoski, Petri, 2003, “Thought Experiments in Science
Studies”,
Philosophica
, 72: 35–59.
Young, Garry, 2013,
Philosophical Psychopathology: Philosophy
Without Thought Experiments
, Hampshire, UK: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Yourgrau, Wolfgang, 1964, “On the Logical Status of
so-called Thought Experiments”,
Proceedings of the Xth
International Congress of the History of Science
, Paris: Herman,
359–362.
–––, 1967, “On models and thought
experiments in quantum theory”,
Monatsberichte der Deutschen
Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin
, 9: 886–874.
Academic Tools
How to cite this entry
.
Preview the PDF version of this entry
at the
Friends of the SEP Society
.
Look up topics and thinkers related to this entry
at the Internet Philosophy Ontology Project (InPhO).
Enhanced bibliography for this entry
at
PhilPapers
, with links to its database.
Other Internet Resources
Thought Experiments
,
 entry in the
Oxford Bibliographies
, by James R. Brown and
Michael T. Stuart.
Goodies
,
 a collection of intriguing questions in the philosophy of science,
some about thought experiments, by John Norton.
An Interactive Version of Thomson’s violin thought experiment
.
Six famous thought Experiments Explained Quickly
,
 a video tutorial.
Ethical Thought Experiments Like the Trolley Dilemma
,
 a video tutorial.
Related Entries
Descartes, René
|
Galileo Galilei
|
intuition
|
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm
|
Mach, Ernst
|
moral psychology: empirical approaches
|
Platonism: in metaphysics
|
rationalism vs. empiricism
Acknowledgments
The editors would like to thank Gintautas Miliauskas (Vilnius
University) for notifying us of a variety of typographical errors in
this entry.